+++
title = "10 Chapter VI NUMERALS"

+++




## CHAPTER VI.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

NUMERALS.

475\. The simple cardinal numerals for the first ten numbers (which are
the foundation of the whole class), with their derivatives, the tens,
and with some of the higher members of the decimal series, are as
follows:

1  
एक  
éka

2  
द्व  
dvá

3  
त्रि  
trí

4  
चतुर्  
catúr

5  
पञ्च  
páñca

6  
षष्  
ṣáṣ

7  
सप्त  
saptá

8  
अष्ट  
aṣṭá

9  
नव  
náva

10
दश  
dáśa


20  
विंशति  
viṅśatí

30

त्रिंशत्  
triṅśát

40
चत्वारिंशत्  
catvāriṅśát

50  
पञ्चाशत्  
pañcāśát

60  
षष्टि  
ṣaṣṭí

70  
सप्तति  
saptatí

80  
अशीति  
aśītí

90  
नवति  
navatí


100  
शत  
śatá

100  
शत  
śatá

1000  
सहस्र  
sahásra

10,000  
अयुत  
ayúta

100,000  
लक्ष +++(/ नियुत)+++  
lakṣá

1,000,000  
प्रयुत  
prayúta

10,000,000  
कोटि  
kóṭi

10⁸  
अर्बुद  
arbudá

10⁹  
महार्बुद  
mahārbuda

10¹⁰  
खर्व  
kharvá

10¹¹  
निखर्व  
nikharva

a\. The accent `saptá` and `aṣṭá` is that belonging to these words in
all accentuated texts; according to the grammarians, they are `sápta`
and `áṣṭa` in the later language. See below, 483.

b\. The series of decimal numbers may be carried still further; but
there are great differences among the different authorities with regard
to their names; and there is more or less of discordance even from
`ayúta` on.

c\. Thus, in the TS. and MS. we find `ayúta`, `niyúta`, `prayúta`,
`árbuda`, `nyàrbuda`, `samudrá`, `mádhya`, `ánta`, `parārdhá`; K.
reverses the order of `niyúta` and `prayúta`, and inserts `badva` after
`nyarbuda` (reading `nyarbudha`): these are probably the oldest recorded
series.

d\. In modern time, the only numbers in practical use above *thousand*
are `lakṣa` (*lac* or *lakh*) and `koṭi` (*crore*); and an Indian sum is
wont to be pointed thus: 123,45,67,890, to signify *123 crores, 45
lakhs, 67 thousand, eight hundred and ninety*.

e\. As to the alleged stem-forms `pañcan` etc., see below, 484. As to
the form `ṣakṣ` instead of `ṣaṣ`, see above, 146b. The stem `dva`
appears in composition and derivation also as `dvā` and `dvi`; `catúr`
in composition is accented `cátur`. The older form of `aṣṭa` is `aṣṭā`:
see below, 483. Forms in -`śat` and -`śati` for the tens are
occasionally interchanged: e. g. `viṅśat` (MBh. R.), `triṅśati` (AB.),
`pañcāśati` (RT.).

f\. The other numbers are expressed by the various composition and
syntactical combination of those given above. Thus:

476\. The odd numbers between the even tens are made by prefixing the
(accented) unit to the ten to which its value is to be added: but with
various irregularities. Thus:

a\. `eka` in *11* becomes `ekā`, but is elsewhere unchanged;

b\. `dva` becomes everywhere `dvā`; but in *42–72* and in *92* it is
interchangeable with `dvi`, and in *82* `dvi` alone is used;

c\. for `tri` is substituted its nom. pl. masc. `tráyas`; but `tri`
itself is also allowed in *43–73* and in *93*, and in *83* `tri` alone
is used;

d\. `ṣaṣ` becomes `ṣo` in *16*, and makes the initial `d` of `daśa`
lingual (199d); elsewhere its final undergoes the regular conversion
(226 b, 198 b) to `ṭ` or `ḍ` or `ṇ`; and in *96* the `n` of `navati` is
assimilated to it (199c);

e\. `aṣṭa` becomes `aṣṭā` (483) in *18–38*, and has either form in the
succeeding combinations.

f\. Thus:

11

`ékādaśa`

31

`ékatriṅśat`

61

`ékaṣaṣṭi`

81

`ékāśīti`

12

`dvā́daśa`

32

`dvā́triṅśat`

62

`dvā́ṣaṣṭi`

82

`dvyàśīti`

`dvíṣaṣṭi`

13

`tráyodaśa`

33

`tráyastriṅśat`

63

`tráyaḥṣaṣṭi`

83

`tryàśīti`

`tríṣaṣṭi`

14

`cáturdaśa`

34

`cátustriṅśat`

64

`cátuḥṣaṣṭi`

84

`cáturaśīti`

15

`páñcadaśa`

35

`páñcatriṅśat`

65

`páñcaṣaṣṭi`

85

`páñcāśīti`

16

`ṣóḍaśa`

36

`ṣáṭtriṅśat`

66

`ṣáṭṣaṣṭi`

86

`ṣáḍaśīti`

17

`saptádaśa`

37

`saptátriṅśat`

67

`saptáṣaṣṭi`

87

`saptā́śīti`

18

`aṣṭā́daśa`

38

`aṣṭā́triṅśat`

68

`aṣṭáṣaṣṭi`

88

`aṣṭā́śīti`

`aṣṭā́ṣaṣṭi`

19

`návadaśa`

39

`návatriṅśat`

69

`návaṣaṣṭi`

89

`návāśīti`



g\. The numbers *21–29* are made like those for *31–39*; the numbers
*41–49*, *51–59*, *71–79*, and *91–99* are made like those for *61–69*.

h\. The forms made with `dvā` and `trayas` are more usual than those
with `dvi` and `tri,` which are hardly to be quoted from the older
literature (V. and Br.). The forms made with `aṣṭā` (instead of `aṣṭa`)
are alone found in the older literature (483), and are usual in the
later.

477\. The above are the normal expressions for the odd numbers. But
equivalent substitutes for them are also variously made. Thus:

a\. By use of the adjectives `ūna` *deficient* and `adhika` *redundant*,
in composition with lesser numbers which are to be subtracted or added,
and either independently qualifying or (more usually) in composition
with larger numbers which are to be increased or diminished by the
others: thus, `tryūnaṣaṣṭiḥ` *sixty deficient by three* (i. e. *57*);
`aṣṭādhikanavatiḥ` *ninety increased by eight* (i. e. *98*);
`ekādhikaṁ śatam` *a hundred increased by one* (i. e. *101*);
`pañconaṁ śatam` *100 less 5* (i. e. *95*). For the nines, especially,
such substitutes as `ekonaviṅśatiḥ` *20 less 1*, or *19*, are not
uncommon; and later the `eka` *1* is left off, and `ūnaviṅśati` etc.
have the same value.

b\. A case-form of a smaller number, generally `éka` *one* is connected
by `ná` *not* with a larger number from which it is to be deducted:
thus, `ékayā ná triṅśát` (śB. PB. KB.) *not thirty by one* (*29*);
`dvābhyāṁ ná ’śītím` (śB.) *not eighty by two* (*78*);
`pañcábhir ná catvā́ri śatā́ni` (śB.) *not four hundred by five* (*395*);
`ékasmān ná pañcāśát` (in ordinal) *49* (TS.); `ékasyāi` (abl. fem.:
307 h) `ná pañcāśát` *49* (TS.); most often, `ékān` (i. e. `ékāt`,
irregular abl. for `ékasmāt`) `ná viṅśatíḥ` *19*; `ékān ná śatám` *99*.
This last form is admitted also in the later language; the others are
found in the Brāhmaṇas.

c\. Instances of multiplication by a prefixed number are occasionally
met with: thus, `triṣaptá` *thrice seven*; `triṇavá` *thrice nine*;
`tridaśá` *thrice ten*.

d\. Of course, the numbers to be added together may be expressed by
independent words, with connecting *and*: thus, `náva ca navatíś ca`, or
`náva navatíś ca` *ninety and nine*; `dvāú ca viṅśatíś ca` *two and
twenty*. But the connective is also (at least, in the older language)
not seldom omitted: thus, `navatír náva` *99*; `triṅśátaṁ trī́n` *33*;
`aśītír aṣṭāú` *88*.

478\. The same methods are also variously used for forming the odd
numbers above 100. Thus:

a\. The added number is prefixed to the other, and takes the accent: for
example, `ékaśatam` *101*; `aṣṭāśatam` *108*; `triṅśácchatam` *130*;
`aṣṭāviṅśatiśatam` *128*; `cátuḥsahasram` (RV.: unless the accent is
wrong) *1004*; `aśītisahasram` *1080*. 

b\. Or, the number to be added is compounded with `adhika` *redundant*,
and the compound is either made to qualify the other number or is
further compounded with it: thus, `pañcādhikaṁ śatam` or
`pañcādhikaśatam` *105*. Of course, `ūna` *deficient* (as also other
words equivalent to `ūna` or `adhika`) may be used in the same way:
thus, `pañconaṁ śatam` 95, `ṣaṣṭiḥ pañcavarjitā` *55*;
`śatam abhyadhikaṁ ṣaṣṭitaḥ` *160*.

c\. Syntactical combinations are made at convenience: for example,
`dáśa śatáṁ ca` *110*; `śatám ékaṁ ca` *101*.

479\. Another usual method (beginning in the Brāhmaṇas) of forming the
odd numbers above 100 is to qualify the larger number by an adjective
derived from the smaller, and identical with the briefer ordinal (below,
487): thus, `dvādaśáṁ śatám`, *112* (lit'ly *a hundred of a 12-sort*, or
*characterised by 12*); `catuścatvāriṅśáṁ śatám` *144*;
`ṣaṭṣaṣṭáṁ śatám` *166*.

480\. To multiply one number by another, among the higher or the lower
denominations, the simplest and least ambiguous method is to make of the
multiplied number a dual or plural, qualified by the other as any
ordinary noun would be; and this method is a common one in all ages of
the language. For example: `páñca pañcāśátas` *five fifties* (*250*);
`náva navatáyas` *nine nineties* (*810*); `aśītíbhis tisṛ́bhis` *with
three eighties* (*240*); `páñca śatā́ni` *five hundreds*;
`trī́ṇi sahásrāṇi` *three thousands*; `ṣaṣṭíṁ sahásrāṇi` *60,000*;
`daśa ca sahasrāṇy aṣṭāu ca śatāni` *10,800*: and, combined with
addition, `trī́ṇi śatā́ni tráyastriṅśataṁ ca` *333*;
`sahasre dve pañconaṁ śatam eva ca` *2095*.

a\. In an exceptional case or two, the ordinal form appears to take the
place of the cardinal as multiplicand in a like combination: thus,
`ṣaṭtriṅśā́ṅś ca catúraḥ` (RV.) *36x4* (lit. four of the thirty-six
kind); `trī́ṅr ekādaśā́n` (RV.) or `traya ekādaśāsaḥ` (śśS. viii. 21. 1)
*11x3*.

b\. By a peculiar and wholly illogical construction, such a combination
as `trīṇi ṣaṣṭiśatāni`, which ought to signify *480* (*3x100+60*), is
repeatedly used in the Brāhmaṇas to mean *360* (*3x100+60*); so also
`dvé catustriṅśé śaté` *234* (not *268*); `dvāṣaṣṭāni trīṇi śatāni`
*362*; and other like cases. And even R. has `trayaḥ śataśatārdhāḥ`
*350*.

481\. But the two factors, multiplier and multiplied, are also, and in
later usage more generally, combined into a compound (accented on the
final); and this is then treated as an adjective, qualifying the
numbered noun; or else its neuter or feminine (in `ī`) singular is used
substantively: thus, `daśaśatā́s` *1000*; `ṣaṭśatāiḥ padātibhiḥ` (MBh.)
*with 600 foot-soldiers*; `tráyastriṅśat triśatā́ḥ ṣaṭsahasrāḥ` (AV.)
*6333*; `dviśatám` or `dviśatī́` *200*; `aṣṭādaśaśatī` *1800*.

a\. In the usual absence of accentuation, there arises sometimes a
question as to how a compound number shall be understood: whether
`aṣṭaśatam`, for example, is `aṣṭáśatam` *108* or `aṣṭaśatám` *800*, and
the like. 

482\. Inflection. The inflection of the cardinal numerals is in many
respects irregular. Gender is distinguished only by the first four.

a\. `Eka` *one* is declined after the manner of a pronominal adjective
(like `sárva`, below, 524); its plural is used in the sense of *some,
certain ones*. Its dual does not occur.

b\. Occasional forms of the ordinary declension are met with: thus,
`éke` (loc. sing.), `ékāt` (477 b).

c\. In the late literature, `eka` is used in the sense of *a certain*,
or even sometimes almost of *a*, as an indefinite article. Thus,
`eko vyāghraḥ` (H.) *a certain tiger*; `ekasmin dine` *on a certain
day*; `haste daṇḍam ekam ādāya` (H.) *taking a stick in his hand*.

d\. `Dva` *two* is dual only, and is entirely regular: thus, N. A. V.
`dvāú` (`dvā́`, Veda) m., `dvé` f. n.; I. D. Ab. `dvā́bhyām`; G. L.
`dváyos`.

e\. `Tri` *three* is in masc. and neut. nearly regular, like an ordinary
stem in `i`; but the genitive is as if from `trayá` (only in the later
language: the regular `trīṇā́m` occurs once in RV.). For the feminine it
has the peculiar stem `tisṛ́`, which is inflected in general like an
`ṛ`-stem; but the nom. and accus. are alike, and show no strengthening
of the `ṛ`; and the `ṛ` is not prolonged in the gen. (excepting in the
Veda). Thus:

m\.

n\.

f\.

N.

`tráyas`

`trī́ṇi`

`tisrás`

A.

`trī́n`

`trī́ṇi`

`tisrás`

I.

`tribhís`

`tisṛ́bhis`

D. Ab.

`tribhyás`

`tisṛ́bhya`

G.

`trayāṇā́m`

`tisṛṇā́m`

L.

`triṣú`

`tisṛ́ṣu`

f\. The Veda has the abbreviated neut. nom. and accus. `trī́`. The
accentuation `tisṛbhís, tisṛbhyás, tisṛ́ṇām`, and `tisṛṣú` is said to be
also allowed in the later language. The stem `tisṛ` occurs in
composition in `tisṛdhanvá` (B.) *a bow with three arrows*.

g\. `Catúr` *four* has `catvā́r` (the more original form) in the strong
cases; in the fem. it substitutes the stem `cátasṛ`, apparently akin
with `tisṛ́`, and inflected like it (but with anomalous change of accent,
like that in the higher numbers: see below, 483). Thus:

m\.

n\.

f\.

N.

`catvā́ras`

`catvā́ri`

`cátasras`

A.

`catúras`

`catvā́ri`

`cátasras`

I.

`catúrbhis`

`catasṛ́bhis`

D. Ab.

`catúrbhyas`

`catasṛ́bhyas`

G.

`caturṇā́m`

`catasṛṇā́m`

L.

`catúrṣu`

`catasṛ́ṣu`.



h\. The use of `n` before `ām` of the gen. masc. and neut. after a final
consonant of the stem is (as in `ṣaṣ`: below, 483) a striking
irregularity. The more regular gen. fem. `catasṝṇām` also sometimes
occurs. In the later language, the accentuation of the final syllable
instead of the penult is said to be allowed in inst., dat.-abl., and
loc.

483\. The numbers from *5* to *19* have no distinction of gender, nor
any generic character. They are inflected, somewhat irregularly, as
plurals, save in the nom.-acc., where they have no proper plural form,
but show the bare stem instead. Of `ṣáṣ` (as of `catúr`), `nām` is the
gen. ending, with mutual assimilation (198 b) of stem-final and initial
of the termination. `Aṣṭá` (as accented in the older language) has an
alternative fuller form, `aṣṭā́`, which is almost exclusively used in the
older literature (V. and B), both in inflection and in composition (but
some compounds with `aṣṭa` are found as early as the AV.); its nom.-acc.
is `aṣṭá` (usual later: found in RV. once, and in AV.), or `aṣṭā́` (RV.),
or `aṣṭāú` (most usual in RV.; also in AV., B., and later).

a\. The accent is in many respects peculiar. In all the accented texts,
the stress of voice lies on the penult before the endings `bhis, bhyas`,
and `su`, from the stems in `a`, whatever be the accent of the stem:
thus, `pañcábhis` from `páñca, navábhyas` from `náva, daśásu` from
`dáśa, navadaśábhis` from `návadaśa, ekādaśábhyas` from
`ékādaśa, dvādaśásu` from `dvā́daśa` (according to the grammarians,
either the penult or the final is accented in these forms in the later
language). In the gen. pl., the accent is on the ending (as in that of
`i-, u-`, and `ṛ`-sterns): thus, `pañcadaśānā́m, saptadaśānā́m`. The cases
of `ṣaṣ`, and those made from the stem-form `aṣṭā`, have the accent
throughout upon the ending.

b\. Examples of the inflection of these words are as follows:

N.A.

`páñca`

`ṣáṭ`

`aṣṭāú`

`aṣṭá`

I.

`pañcábhis`

`ṣaḍbhís`

`aṣṭābhís`

`aṣṭábhis`

D. Ab.

`pañcábhyas`

`ṣaḍbhyás`

`aṣṭābhyás`

`aṣṭábhyas`

G.

`pañcānā́m`

`ṣaṇṇā́m`

`aṣṭānā́m`

L.

pañcásu

ṣaṭsú

aṣṭāsú

aṣṭásu.

c\. `Saptá` (in the later language `sápta`, as `áṣṭa` for `aṣṭá`) and
`náva` and `dáśa`, with the compounds of `dáśa` (*11–19*), are declined
like `páñca`, and with the same shift of accent (or with alternative
shift to the endings, as pointed out above).

484\. The Hindu grammarians give to the stems for *5* and *7–19* a final
`n`: thus, `pañcan, saptan, aṣṭan, navan, daśan`, and `ekādaśan` etc.
This, however, has nothing to do with the demonstrably original final
nasal of *7*, *9*, and *10* (compare *septem, novem, decem; seven, nine,
ten*); it is only owing to the fact that, starting from such a
stem-form, their inflection is made to assume a more regular aspect, the
nom.-acc. having the form of a neut. sing. in an, and the instr.,
dat.-abl., and loc. that of a neut. or masc. pl. in `an`: compare
`nā́ma, nā́mabhis, ` `nā́mabhyas`, `nā́masu` — the gen. alone being,
rather, like that of an `a`-stem: compare `daśānā́m` with `índrāṇām` and
`nā́mnām` or `ātmánām`. No trace whatever of a final `n` is found
anywhere in the language, in inflection or derivation or composition,
from any of these words (though śB. has twice `daśaṁdaśín`, for the
usual `daśadaśín`).

485\. a. The tens, `viṅśatí` and `triṅśát` etc., with their compounds,
are declined regularly, as feminine stems of the same endings, and in
all numbers.

b\. `śatá` and `sahásra` are declined regularly, as neuter (or, rarely,
in the later language, as masculine) stems of the same final, in all
numbers.

c\. The like is true of the higher numbers — which have, indeed, no
proper numeral character, but are ordinary nouns.

486\. Construction. As regards their construction with the nouns
enumerated by them —

a\. The words for 1 to 19 are in the main used adjectively, agreeing in
case, and, if they distinguish gender, in gender also, with the nouns:
thus, `daśábhir vīrāíḥ` *with ten heroes*; `yé devā́ divy ékādaśa sthá`
(AV.) *what eleven gods of you are in heaven*; `pañcásu jáneṣu` *among
the five tribes*; `catasṛbhir gīrbhíḥ` *with four songs*. Rarely occur
such combinations as `dáśa kaláśānām` (RV.) *ten pitchers*, `ṛtūnāṁ ṣaṭ`
(R.) *six seasons*.

b\. The numerals above *19* are construed usually as nouns, either
taking the numbered noun as a dependent genitive, or standing in the
singular in apposition with it: thus, `śataṁ dāsīḥ` or `śataṁ dāsīnām`
*a hundred slaves* or *a hundred of slaves*; `viṅśatyā́ háribhiḥ` *with
twenty bays*; `ṣaṣṭyā́ṁ śarátṣu` *in 60 autumns*; `śaténa pā́śāiḥ` *with a
hundred fetters*;
`śatáṁ sahásram ayútaṁ nyàrbudaṁ jaghā́na śakró dásyūnām` (AV.) *the
mighty* \[Indra\] *slew a hundred, a thousand, a myriad, a hundred
million, of demons*. Occasionally they are put in the plural, as if used
more adjectively: thus, `pañcāśadbhir bāṇāiḥ` *with fifty arrows*.

c\. In the older language, the numerals for 5 and upward are sometimes
used in the nom.-acc. form (or as if indeclinably) with other cases
also: thus, `páñca kṛṣṭíṣu` *among the five races*; `saptá rṣīṇām` *of
seven bards*; `sahásram ṛ́ṣibhiḥ` *with a thousand bards*;
`śatám pūrbhíḥ` *with a hundred strongholds*. Sporadic instances of a
like kind are also met with later.

487\. Ordinals. Of the classes of derivative words coming from the
original or cardinal numerals, the ordinals are by far the most
important; and the mode of their formation may best be explained here. 

Some of the first ordinals are irregularly made: thus,

a\. `éka` *1* forms no ordinal; instead is used `prathamá` (i. e.
`pratama` *foremost*); `ādya` (from `ādi` *beginning*) appears first in
the Sūtras, and `ādima` much later;

b\. from `dvá` *2*, and `trí` *3*, come `dvitī́ya` and `tṛtī́ya`
(secondarily, through `dvita` and abbreviated `trita`);

c\. `catúr` *4*, `ṣáṣ` *6*, and `saptá` *7*, take the ending `tha`:
thus, `caturthá`, `ṣaṣṭhá`, `saptátha`; but for *fourth* are used also
`turī́ya` and `túrya`, and `saptátha` belongs to the older language only;
`pañcatha`, for *fifth*, is excessively rare;

d\. the numerals for *5* and *7* usually, and for *8*, *9*, *10*, add
`ma`, forming `pañcamá`, `saptamá`, `aṣṭamá`, `navamá`, `daśamá`;

e\. for *11th* to *19th*, the forms are `ekādaśá`, `dvādaśá`, and so on
(the same with the cardinals, except change of accent); but `ekādaśama`
etc. occasionally occur also;

f\. for the tens and intervening odd numbers from *20* onward, the
ordinal has a double form — one made by adding the full (superlative)
ending `tamá` to the cardinal: thus, `viṅśatitamá`, `triṅśattamá`,
`aśītitamá`, etc.; the other, shorter, in `a`, with abbreviation of the
cardinal: thus, `viṅśá` *20th*; `triṅśá` *30th*; `catvāriṅśá` *40th*;
`pañcāśá` *50th*; `ṣaṣṭá` *60th*; `saptatá` *70th*; `aśītá` *80th*;
`navatá` *90th*; and so likewise `ekaviṅśá` *21st*, `catustriṅśá`
*34th*; `aṣṭācatvāriṅśá` *48th*; `dvāpañcāśá` *52d*; `ekaṣaṣṭá` *61st*;
and `ekānnaviṅśá` and `ūnaviṅśá` and `ekonaviṅśá` *19th*; — and so on.
Of these two forms, the latter and briefer is by far the more common,
the other being not quotable from the Veda, and extremely rarely from
the Brāhmaṇas. From *50th* on, the briefer form is allowed by the
grammarians only to the odd numbers, made up of tens and units; but it
is sometimes met with, even in the later language, from the simple ten.

g\. Of the higher numbers, `śatá` and `sahásra` form `śatatamá` and
`sahasratamá`; but their compounds have also the simpler form: thus,
`ekaśatá` or `ekaśatatama` *101st*.

h\. Of the ordinals, `prathamá` (and `ādya`), `dvitī́ya`, `tṛtī́ya`, and
`turī́ya` (with `túrya`) form their feminine in `ā`; all the rest make it
in `ī`.

488\. The ordinals, as in other languages, have other than ordinal
offices to fill; and in Sanskrit especially they are general adjectives
to the cardinals, with a considerable variety of meanings, as
fractionals, as signifying *composed of so many parts* or
*so-many-fold*, or *containing so many*, or (as was seen above, 479)
*having so many added*.

a\. In a fractional sense, the grammarians direct that their accent be
shifted to the first syllable: thus, `dvítīya` *half*; `tṛ́tīya` *third
part*; `cáturtha` *quarter*; and so on. But in accented texts only
`tṛ́tīya` *third*, and `cáturtha` (śB.) and `túrīya` *quarter*, are found
so treated; for *half* occurs only `ardhá`; and `caturthá` (MS. etc.),
`pañcamá`, and so on, are accented as in their ordinal use.

489\. There are other numeral derivatives: thus —

a\. multiplicative adverbs, as `dvís` *twice*, `trís` *thrice*, `catús`
*four times*;

b\. adverbs with the suffixes `dhā` (1104) and `śas` (1106): for
example, `ekadhā́ ` *in one way*, `śatadhā́ ` *in a hundred ways*;
`ekaśas` *one by one*, śataśás *by hundreds*;

c\. collectives, as `dvítaya` or `dvayá` *a pair*, `dáśjataya` or
`daśát` *a decade*;

d\. adjectives like `dvika` *composed of two*, `pañcaka` *consisting of
five* or *fives*;

and so on; but their treatment belongs rather to the dictionary, or to
the chapter on derivation.
