+++
title = "२ PREFACE SIVARAMAKRISHNA"
+++
This edition of the Svarasiddhantacandrika is the result of my collated study of eight Manuscripts, the chief of which is Ms. obtained by me long ago from Maduras though a good number of readings have been taken from other manuscripts. Ms. belongs to M. R. Ry. K.. S. Narasimha Sastri Avl., Chidambaram, which was originally in the possession of the late MM. Harihara Sastrigal Avl., Chidambaram. is an incomplete palm leaf Ms. owned by M. R. Ry. S. Ramasubba Sastri Avl., Senior Pandit in Sanskrit, Annamalai University. Ms. is that of M.R.Ry. N. Vaidyanatha Sastri Avl., Raja's College, Tiruvadi. , a palm-leaf Ms., has been obtained from the Government Oriental Ms. Library, Madras, and (incomplete) and , also on cadjan leaves, from the Adyar Library. These documents supply us with a satisfactory and harmonious text, though corruptions of Vedic passages are patent in most of them. These Vedic passages as found in the Mss. are preserved in the text, but their correct forms and accents are given in the Index. Hence they are not included in the errata. The Svaramañjarīkāra (p. 26, 1. 22) mentioned in all the Mss. seems to be a mistake for the Vṛttikara. It is noteworthy that the Värttika-tricakrādīnām chandasyupasankhyanam-is found in none of the Mss. It is highly gratifying that sufficient material is available for this edition of a most valuable commentary on the much neglected Svarasutras of Panin'. In spite of careful proof-reading errors have crept in for which, I regret, I myself am mostly responsible. 

I must express my indebtedness to the Right Hon'ble V. S. Srinivasa Sastrigal, P.C., C.H.,LL.D., Vice-chancellor, for his graciousness in permitting me to dedicate this work to him. I cannot sufficiently thank Mahamahopadhaya Vidyavacaspati Kulapati Darśanakalanidhi Professor S. Kuppuswami Sastrigal Avl., M. A., I. E. S. (Retd.), Honorary Professor of Sanskrit, Annamalai University, for his great condescension in writing a Foreword to this work, in spite of his multifarious duties and heavy literary labours. I have to acknowledge with gratitude the [[viii]] privilege accorded to me by the University authorities in entrusting me with this publication, and the facilities they have given me for comparing manuscripts in the Madras Government and Adyar Libraries. I have also to thank the authorities of those Libraries and my good friends for their kind permission to me to use their Mss. 
I record here with pleasure my thanks to my friends M. R. Ry. Mimämsakaratna V. A. Ramaswami Sastrigal Avl., M.A., Lecturer in Sanskrit, and M.R.Ry. R. Satyanatha Aiyar Avl., M.A., L.T., Lecturer in History, for their many helpful sugges tions and for their special assistance in translating my Sanskrit Introduction into English. Lastly, I must express my high appreciation of the great care taken by the Madras Law Journal Press in printing this work.  

ANNAMALAINAGAR,   
20-8-1936.  
K. A. SIVARAMAKRISHNA SASTRI. 

