+++
title = "00"
short_title = "00"

+++



देववाणीप्रवेशिका Devavāṇīpraveśikā  

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE SANSKRIT LANGUAGE  

Third Edition  

Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. Sutherland Goldman



To our students and our teachers  

नहि सुशिक्षितो ऽपि नटबटुः स्वस्कन्धमारोढुं पटुः  

"No matter how well-trained the tumbler's boy, he will never be able to stand on his own shoulders."





## About the Authors

Robert P. Goldman received his Ph.D. from the University of Penn sylvania in 1971. He is Professor of Sanskrit and Chair of the Center for South Asian Studies at the University of California at Berkeley, where he has taught Sanskrit for many years. He is the General Editor of the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa Translation Project as well as one of its principal translators. He has taught and published widely in the areas of Sanskrit literature, epic, and traditional Indian culture.



Sally J. Sutherland Goldman received her Ph.D. from the University of California at Berkeley in 1979, where she has since taught Sanskrit and related subjects. She is the Associate Editor of the Vālmiki Rāmāyaṇa Translation Project as well as one of its principal transla tors. In addition to her work on the Rāmāyaṇa, she has edited two books and has written numerous articles on women in the early Indian tradition.



## Preface to the Third Edition

With the need for a new printing of the Devavāņipraveśikā, we de cided that it would be desirable to produce a new edition, further refining and modifying various grammatical explanations and exercises in the text. Many of the resultant changes arose out of suggestions made by students and colleagues who were using our Sanskrit primer. We are most grateful for their suggestions. Two of the most important changes in this edition are the addition of an English to Sanskrit Glossary as well as an Index. The lack of these has been felt by our students over the years, and we are glad that we have finally been able to address it in this new edition.

We would like to express our very special thanks to Chandan Narayan, graduate student in the Department of South and Southeast Asian Studies, without whose energy and tireless efforts this project never would have been completed. We would also like to thank Richard Lasseigne of the Space Sciences Laboratory at the University of California at Berkeley for letting us use his fonts, “Devanāgarī” and “Times Nāgarī,” to typeset this edition and for his good-natured help in solving our many technical problems its use entailed. We would also like to thank Deven Patel, a graduate student in the Department of South and South east Asian Studies, for helping us enter the text into the computer. We would also like to express our gratitude to the staff at the Center for South Asia Studies, especially Raba Gunasekara, Choo Hawj Yaj, and Ann Higgins, for their help and support in this project. Finally we would also like to extend a special word of thanks to the students in the 1998 99 first year Sanskrit class, who suffered through the rough draft of the revised text. Their thoughtful and insightful comments and sugges tions have been invaluable in the revision of this work. Special thanks go to Simone Barretta, Karen Beal, Prudence Farrow Bruns, Ami Buch, Mukhesh Darke, Hung Van Ho, Eun-Sun Jang, Hudaya Kandahjaya, Manali Kasbekar, Michael Gressett, Layne Little, Hollis Meyer deLancey, V. Sundararajan, and Kristin Johnston Sutton.

Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. Sutherland Goldman Berkeley 1999

## Preface to the First Edition

No American Sanskritist, or for that matter no student of Sanskrit in America who has suffered through the "traditional," quasi-inductive Whitney-Perry-Lanman method, would question the desirability of new Sanskrit teaching materials. Indeed, the interest in and enthusiasm for such materials that I' have seen on the part of numerous Sanskrit teachers and students is undoubtedly the result of a growing frustration with the limits of the existing materials.

I do not mean to denigrate the work of the above named authors. On the contrary I shall continue to use Lanman as my first reader, while it is clear that, aside from the dated nature of his terminology and the archaism of his style, Whitney has stood the test of time admirably, remaining a valuable reference grammar for Sanskrit and Vedic.

The problem in the teaching of Sanskrit in this country has been simply that books like Whitney's Grammar and Lanman's Reader have, for want of acceptable alternatives, been used for a task to which they are poorly suited. Most students find it at best frustrating and painful to try to learn any language, not to mention a language like Sanskrit, from a reference grammar and from the depressingly small portions of a reader that one can cover in such a first-year course. That some students do manage to continue and ultimately gain some measure of control over the language speaks largely for an enthusiasm and dedica tion on the part of teacher and student which are able to keep them going in spite of the first-year materials. Even those relatively few students who persevere and do well in comparison with their class mates seldom have any usable knowledge of Sanskrit as they enter the second year.

The origins of this problem are, I think, to be found, in part, in the history of Sanskrit in American universities. With a few distinguished exceptions, most American (and European) Sanskritists have come to the study of Sanskrit in a roundabout way. Many have been linguists,philologists or classicists for whom Sanskrit has been a secondary in terest and who, because of their profound knowledge of the classical languages, were able to teach themselves and their students, after a fashion, on the basis of such materials as described above. Others, like some comparative religionists, have come to regard Sanskrit as a "tool" whereby they would be able to get at the "meat” of some circumscribed type of text. For their purposes the traditional" method was adequate.

(The "T" in the preface refers to Robert P. Goldman, who put together the original draft for Devavāṇipraveśikā. In 1980, Sally J. Sutherland (Goldman) was given co-author status.) 

Yet, as professional Indologists know, a mere "working knowledge" of Sanskrit will not do for those who are truly interested in the almost overwhelming richness of India's traditional culture; literary, intellec tual, scientific, and spiritual. For the Sanskrit language is not merely an abstruse code to be cracked laboriously to read a given message. Neither is it solely of interest insofar as it represents a well-preserved example of an old Indo-European language. Rather, it has served as the very medium of much of the finest in India's long and illustrious history of art, science, philosophy, and religion. In its timelessness, in its subtlety, in its delight in the profusion of its own forms, the Sanskrit language is a kind of mirror for the whole of traditional Indian culture. It is no wonder that for classical India the study of grammar was re garded as men's highest intellectual endeavor.

But my intention here is not to write a polemic on the value of San skrit education. Rather, I shall introduce materials which, my experience has shown, can make that education a more efficient and more reward ing experience.

Since I began teaching Sanskrit I have been approached by literally hundreds of students interested in India in Indian literature, religions, and philosophies. Many of these students, though bright and moti vated, had no Greek or Latin, no training in linguistics, and often only a nodding acquaintance with languages other than English. Students like these have been turning up in fair numbers for first year Sanskrit for years, to go on, thanks to the typical 80-90% attrition rate, only in a trickle to more advanced courses. This problem has become more no ticeable in the past few years as more and more students have expressed interest in things Indian.

Potentially good students were dropping out of Sanskrit simply for the want of a clear, self-contained progressive Sanskrit textbook which did not presuppose advanced linguistic or philological training on their part. My aim here has been to provide such a text. My own experience with it, over three years of use, has been most encouraging. I am satis fied that most of my students know, by the end of their first year, as much Sanskrit as I and my contemporaries knew at the end of our sec ond. But the real test of these materials is in the hands of teachers other than the author. It is for them and their students to say how far I have succeeded in my aim.

My purpose, then, in writing this primer, was to provide a self-con tained primer, workbook and reader for teaching first-year Sanskrit to students with no previous linguistic training. The work is not intended to serve as a comprehensive reference grammar of the classical lan guage. There are already a fair number of these, some of which, like Gonda's useful work, are specially aimed at the student of linguistics. Rather, I have tried throughout the work to introduce, explain and il lustrate the most significant features of the language and through verses, quotations, and readings encourage the growing interest in Sanskrit as a means of expression and a medium of a rich culture.

To these ends the grammar has been, in several areas, simplified to prevent the beginner from being more hampered than is absolutely necessary by relatively insignificant paradigms, rules, and exceptions. This does not mean that the course is by any means an easy one. There is all the material that the best students can handle in their first year and much to which the more advanced will wish to return repeatedly. The study of Sanskrit is by its nature demanding and I have accord ingly geared this approach to the student with some natural aptitude for the language.

Upon completion of this course, students should have a real working knowledge of the major outlines of Sanskrit grammar. They should be able to read and compose sophisticated Sanskrit sentences with some facility and read, with dictionary, approximately five to ten verses of the Vālmiki Rāmāyaṇa or a similar text in an hour.

### Method:

The grammar of classical Sanskrit is, for many reasons, an unusually complex system for students to master. For this reason I have through out this work excluded many rules, exceptions, forms, and grammatical subtleties that I regard as unnecessary for an elementary course. Many of these items occur but rarely and, as such, seem to me to place a strain on the already overburdened memory of the first-year student without repaying the effort required to learn them. This notion has led me to what might be described as a sort of statistical" method whereby I have stressed forms, rules and even lexical items which are statisti cally quite common in texts and in the usage of the pandits and enable the student to express general ideas simply. I have adhered to this practice even when more common and useful forms are themselves exceptions to general rules. Thus, for example, I cite and stress the important, though irregular, root jñā to illustrate the ninth gana. As examples of simplification I have throughout cited verbal roots as be ing either parasmai pada or ātmanepada even in cases in which optional conjugation is permitted by the grammarians. The arrangement of the material in the text was intended to enable the student to increase his repertoire of usable grammatical material steadily. Thus, verbal and nominal paradigms are introduced together, the more common or use ful appearing in the earlier chapters. In addition to this rough functional ordering of the material, the amount of time spent on explanation of the various grammatical features of Sanskrit has been weighted in ac cordance with the degree to which a given formation normally presents conceptual difficulties to the English speaker. Thus, much of the ma terial, even when it is complex, like the gana-s of the present system and the problems of the perfect system, requires a good deal of simple memorization but no special explanation as to usage. On the other hand, it has been my experience that certain issues, especially the na ture of the karmaņi prayoga, the uses of participles and, of course, the formation and application of bahuvrihi compounds are almost always perplexing to my students. I have accordingly spent a proportionately greater amount of time and effort on these forms. This will be clear from an examination of Lessons 13 and 15 where I have preferred the risk of seeming repetitive to the certainty that, without such repetition, the use of the bahuvrihi-s and the present participles will remain mys terious to most students. Pronunciation, Script, Sandhi:

Three issues which deserve special mention here, and form the sub jects of the first three lessons, are pronunciation, script, and sandhi. Teaching the proper pronunciation of Sanskrit is, I think, important. Sanskrit has the distinction of being perhaps the only language in the world which is neither "dead" nor "living." It is a special, timeless language whose recitation, chanting, and even speaking are still much practiced and prized in certain contexts in India. I found in my own case and in the case of my students, the ability to speak and understand spoken Sanskrit has had the twin advantages of increasing the morale and motivation of the students and, partly because of this, noticeably increasing their ability to grasp and internalize the common forms and regular syntactic patterns of the language. Moreover, ability to prop erly pronounce Sanskrit and to correctly recite a few well-known verses and proverbs makes a good impression upon Indian Sanskritists and facilitates what should be a very valuable communication with them.

Pronunciation of Sanskrit is not really very difficult. Only a few points cause serious difficulty for English speakers. On the other hand, it is clearly not possible to master the pronunciation of any language without a proper model. For this purpose, I have been fortunate to have available to me a series of traditionally trained pandits fluent in spoken Sanskrit. This is, alas, not possible at most places where San skrit is taught. For this reason I am preparing, with some pandits, a series of tapes2 for use with the primer. These will serve as a basis for emulation. Until these tapes are obtained, careful study of the material in Lesson I will have to serve, however poorly, to provide the basics of Sanskrit phonology.

2 "Many users have called and written over the years in order to secure copies of the tapes for assistance with pronunciation. These tapes, including a supplement with all the new verses, may be ordered directly from the Language Laboratory, Univer sity of California at Berkeley, 94720."Taken from the Preface to the Second Edition, 1986, p. xvii (SJG 1998).

The issue of the use of the devanāgari script is to my mind a simple one. This text is aimed primarily at students who plan to make some serious use of Sanskrit literature. I have found that failure to introduce the devanāgari script at a very early stage leads to an excessive reli ance on transliteration, which, in many cases has led to a lasting inability to read comfortably what is after all not a very difficult script. In order to avoid this I have introduced the devanā gari script in the second lesson. From that point on until the tenth lesson, forms and examples are given both in nāgari and transliteration. This enables students to become increasingly familiar with the script while they are not depen dent upon it for an understanding of grammar. From the tenth lesson onwards the use of transliteration is abandoned and the student is com pelled to rely upon his knowledge of the script. The readings are given only in nā gari throughout. As a result of this method, I have rarely had a student for whom the script presents any serious problem by the middle of the course.

In the case of sandhi, as with the grammar in general, I have found it useful to minimize or eliminate rules of rare or trivial application. My general purpose in the sandhi lesson (Lesson 3) is to provide the mini mum number of rules for the generation and interpretation of syntactic units. Accordingly, I have stressed the basic rules of external sandhi. It has been my experience that it is very difficult for beginning stu dents to master what, in the absence of any knowledge of the grammar and vocabulary, is an almost wholly abstract system of sound changes. Therefore, except for some important exceptions, I have left many of the individual important issues of internal sandhi to be presented in conjunction with morphological processes in which they figure promi nently.

Thus the treatment of sandhi in this primer, while more than suffi cient for the first-year student, is not intended to be exhaustive or systematic. Such a treatment, however, is to be found in the elegant and useful Sanskrit Sandhi and Exercises of M. B. Emeneau and B. A. van Nooten published by the University of California Press. I recom mend that students work through these exercises after completing those of Lesson 3 and while working through the materials of the following lessons.

### Use of Sanskrit Grammatical Terminology:

One additional point which requires some comment is the usage of Sanskrit grammatical terminology. I have used this terminology throughout the primer for various reasons. Apart from the interests of classicists and comparative philologists, there seems to me to be no reason whatever to abandon the precise and sophisticated terminology of the Indian grammarians for the poorly adapted and often simply misleading terminology of classical grammars. Forone thing it is some thing of a disservice to the most incisive and accurate tradition of linguistics that the world has known. Indeed, many modern linguists are turning to Sanskrit for its subtle terminology. Moreover, learning the proper terms, like learning proper pronunciation, contributes to the enthusiasm and sense of progress in a new study which is important to student motivation.

In any case the Sanskrit terminology is designed for Sanskrit gram mar. Many of the terms (e.g., tatpuruşa, bhūte krdanta, etc.) are themselves examples of the forms they designate. On the other hand, Western terminology is frequently confusing. Thus, we have been taught to contrast active and passive voice as well as active and middle when the term "active" represents two completely different concepts. The term "past passive participle" is used to indicate a form which is by no means always "passive." Indeed, with regard to something like the issue of "passive" to "active" transformation, the whole idea of subject and object which we learn in school is rather different from that expounded by the Sanskrit grammarians. To avoid confusion on the part of those who have had some Sanskrit previously, I have al ways given the Western term alongside the Sanskrit term. I suggest, however, that the latter be used. A glossary of Sanskrit grammatical terms has been provided.

For similar reasons I have given paradigms to be learned in the tradi tional Indian fashion rather than in the usual Western way. One additional reason for this is that it seems, especially in the case of nomi nal declension, simpler to learn groups of three (one case at a time) than to try to get sets of seven (one number at a time) by heart.

### A Note on Vocabulary:

The vocabulary of Sanskrit presents a serious problem to the learner. First of all he is deprived of the help of the many cognates so easily recognizable in European languages. Moreover, the lexicon of San skrit is extremely large. There is a great deal of true synonymity while homonyms abound. Indeed, the whole problem is made more complex by the fact that each different type of text has, to a large extent, its own specialized vocabulary. For the second-year student these problems become dominant; however, as I think that the first duty of the begin ner is to master the grammar, I do not place any great emphasis in the first year on vocabulary acquisition. I have found that students will manage to learn a fair working vocabulary from the readings in this text and are able to summarize the story as they go along with little difficulty. Nonetheless, the grammar is ample material for the begin ner and accordingly, I usually provide a small glossary for all words that I feel the students do not know readily, on all quizzes and exami nations. Use of the Primer:

This primer is intended to provide material for approximately the -first twenty weeks of an elementary Sanskrit course. The actual rate at which a class is able to move through the lessons will vary somewhat with the circumstances, number of hours per week, etc. The course has been designed to cover the first two of three ten-week quarters of First Year Sanskrit at the University of California at Berkeley. This class meets for 41/2 hours per week. I have also used the same mate rial for a special ten-week intensive course which met for 15 hours per week. In general a rate of one lesson per week should be about right but time should be allowed for frequent review and, in any case, there is no point in rushing a class through the material. Each class will find its own rate. Each lesson from Lesson Four to Lesson Twenty-one consists of rules and forms illustrated with Sanskrit examples and ex plained so that the student may follow the rationale behind the rules. Each lesson is followed by a series of exercises consisting of practice in translation from Sanskrit to English and English to Sanskrit and various types of grammatical drill. A special feature of the primer is that each of these lessons is followed by a graded reading passage which specially illustrates the forms introduced in that particular chapter while providing increasingly sophisticated use of previously acquired mate rial. These readings are also of cultural value as they form, together, a concise retelling of the main story of the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa from the curse of Dasaratha to the abduction of Sītā. The readings of the later lessons incorporate more and more verses from the epic text itself, while Lesson Twenty-two consists wholly of a selection of verses which complete the epic tale.

Exercises and reading should be assigned daily and may be broken up into whatever units are deemed advisable. I have found it advisable to have students read a little ahead of the material being covered in class and in the homework.

In the later chapters I have provided some verses from various works of Sanskrit literature. These generally illustrate some of the grammar of the lessons in which they appear. They are to be memorized for classroom recitation and this, along with reading from the Rāma story, should be drilled regularly in class.

I have also found it useful to have students keep current their own short version of the main elements of the Rāma story to be read and discussed in class.

Quizzes should be frequent, not less than every two or three lessons. When the primer is completed, the rest of the first year should be used to build vocabulary and grammatical skills by reading and practicing composition. Lanman's reader is very useful for this purpose, espe cially his selections from the Hitopadeśa and the Kathāsaritsāgara. I have found it entertaining and very helpful to ask the students to write their own brief Hitopadeśa stories based on the characters and situa tions of the selections chosen from Lanman. If the students are quick and desire some variety, they may be given some Rāmāyaṇa or Mahābhārata (especially Gitā) towards the end of the year.

R. P. Goldman

## Acknowledgments

A work of this kind owes much to many people; my teachers, my colleagues, and my students. Many teachers have inspired and guided me in my Sanskrit studies. Among these my debt is greatest to Dr. W. Norman Brown who set, by his scholarship and kindness, an example easy to admire, impossible to emulate. Pandit Śrīnivāsa Šāstri of the Deccan College, with his profound learning and flawless Sanskrit, has been a constant inspiration. Professors Emest Bender and Ludo Rocher of the University of Pennsylvania through teaching and guidance pre pared me in many ways to undertake this work. Special mention must be made of Professor Royal Weiler who first introduced me to the in tricacies and frustrations of sandhi and the other terrors of Sanskrit which I have inflicted, in turn, on a new generation of Sanskritists.

My colleagues at the University of California have always been ready to examine and discuss this work as it took shape and it has benefited greatly from the suggestions of them all. Professor Murray Emeneau was kind enough to read through the first draft and made a number of helpful suggestions. My associate Vidvan Vinayaka Parameshwara Bhatta worked through these materials in class with me three times and has on innumerable occasions given me the benefit of his advice in matters of grammar and style. The present work owes much to his careful reading. Finally, I find it difficult to express fully my gratitude to my teacher, friend and colleague, Professor V. W. Paranjpe of Poona University. While teaching at the University of California at Berkeley during the academic year 1973-1974, Dr. Paranjpe read through the manuscript several times. His never-failing counsel, based on his mas every aspect of Sanskrit language and literature, enabled me time and again to clarify, for myself as well as my students, a number of diffi culties in the following chapters and, especially, in the reading selections.

If this work has been inspired by my teacher and encouraged by my colleagues, still it is to my student that it owes its existence and to whom it is dedicated. It was through working with many students at the Universities of Rochester and California that I realized the pressing nature of the need for new Sanskrit teaching materials. All my stu dents have encouraged me in my desire to provide such materials and borne with me patiently while serving as guinea pigs in this experi ment. They have suffered cheerfully through missing glossary entries, misnumberings, and opacities of presentation in the working draft. That they have maintained their enthusiasm through all this and still man aged to learn Sanskrit in an efficient fashion is, I think, a tribute to their dedication. My thanks to all of them. A number of my students have taken on the special burden of helping with the actual preparation of the text. They have worked efficiently and creatively in the most diffi cult circumstances, presses by deadlines, working with difficult materials and still carrying on their own school work with distinction. Reed Slatkin took on the task of editing and typing the first draft from my minimally legible handwritten copy and carried it out with his typi cal enthusiasm and energy. Matthew Kapstein corrected the copy and wrote out, in a clear and elegant hand, all the devanāgari for the first working text. Both these men offered many valuable suggestions and corrections. Their job was particularly hard as I was teaching from the text all the time forcing them to meet copy-service and classroom dead lines week after week. The devanāgari for the corrected copy was written by Denis Lahey who also assisted with the revision and expan sion of the exercises. Cynthia Dzendzel had perhaps the hardest job of all. Knowing no Sanskrit she managed to type the final copy from a seemingly incoherent mass of corrections, and revisions full of San skrit transliteration, with a speed and accuracy that were truly remarkable.

Finally, I should like express my gratitude to the South and South east Asia Center of the University of California, and to its most recent directors—Professors Warren Ilchman, Eugene Irschick, and Bruce Pray for providing support without which this work would simply not have been possible.

Berkeley 1980

### Acknowledgments to the Second Edition
We would like to express our gratitude to Ms. Kathy Glass and Ms. Sali Peterson for their assis tance in the preparation of this edition.

R. P. Goldman and S. J. Sutherland Berkeley 1986.

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

### 01:

1.4

Phonology Fore-s (svara-s-vowels) and 49 51A-s (vyañjana-s— consonants), 1 FOR (svara) sounds: YG (suddha-simple vowels) and

samyukta-complex vowels), 2 295 (vyañjana) sounds; qof-s (varga-s—classes) and

1.6

1.7

1.8 1.14 1.15 1.17 1.18

1.19 
### 02:

2.1 2.2 2.3 2.9 2.11 2.13

FETA-s (sthāna-s-points of articulation), 2 37681F-s (antaḥstha-s-semi-vowels), 4 354-s (üşman-s-sibilants), 4 376R (anusvāra) and fashi (visarga), 4 Pronunciation, 4 Stress, 9

The Devanāgari Script The Arri (nāgari) alphabet, 13 Formation of the prināgari) symbols, 14 The स्वर (svara) अ (a), 14 Post consonantal forms of vowels other than 37 (a), 15 Additional notes on a few post consonantal vowels, 15 The faria (virāma) (2), 16 Consonant sequences (conjunct consonants), 16 Horizontal conjuncts, 17 Vertical conjuncts, 17 Special reduced consonants: 7(s); }(r); 7 (t), 17

The conjuncts (ñ) and (ks), 18 Syllabic nature of Sanskrit: the 3187 (akşara syllable), 18 Roman transliteration of Pri (nāgari), 19 Garri (devanāgarī) numerals (1-10), 19

The 31946 (avagraha) (5), 19

2.14

2.18

2.19

2.21

2.22 2.23

2.24 2.25 2.26

xxi

3.13


### 03: Sandhi (See Index of Important Sandhi Rules)

3.0 Definition of HF(sandhi), 23 3.1 Internal and external Hau (sandhi), 23 3.2 External vowel Hau (sandhi), 23 3.5 Vowel strength, 25 3.6 Ju (guņa) and area (vrddhi), 25 3.10 Complex vowels, 27

Examples from internal Hu (sandhi), 27 3.14 Final 37 (0) and 3 (au), 28 3.17 Final (e), 28 3.19 Vowel hiatus, 29 3.20 Loss of 31 (a) before final (e), 29 3.21 Te (pragshya) vowels, 29 3.22 Initial and final positions: original finals, 29 3.23

Possible absolute finals, 30 3.24

Vowels in absolute final position, 31 3.25

Consonants in absolute final position, 31

Hu (sandhi) of original final "-" (-s), 32 3.29 faret (visarga)“-F? (-s) following non“-31” (-a)

vowels, 32

Original final“-T' (-s) after “31” (a) vowels, 35 3.40 Original final “-3R” (-ar), 37 3.41 General principles of consonant Hiru (sandhi), 38 3.42 Assimilation in external Hpu (sandhi) of final 437

(sparśa) sounds, 38 3.46 External Hau (sandhi) of nasals, 40 3.48 Afu (sandhi) of absolute final nasals, 40 3.50 Treatment of absolute final “-T' (-n), 41

3.57 Internal Au (sandhi), 42 
### 04: Parts of Speech and the Sanskrit Sentence 4.0 Conjugation of verbs; declension of nouns and

pronouns, 47 4.3 The finite verb, fasa (tiñanta); the nominal item,

सुबन्त (subanta); the adverbial item, अव्ययपद (avyayapada), 47

3.26

3.32

xxii4.4 4.5 4.9 4.12 4.13 4.14 4.15 4.16 4.17

4.19

4.20 4.21

4.22 4.23 4.24 4.25 4.26 4.27 4.28 4.30 4.32 4.33 4.36 4.37

The Sanskrit verb: U-s (dhātu-s-verbal roots), 47 Finite verbs, 48 Person 16 (puruşa), 49 Number of (vacana), 50 Tense onts (kāla), 51 Mode, 51 Voice, 52 परस्मैपद (parasmaipada) and आत्मनेपद (atmanepada), 52 347146 (ubhayapada) verbs: (verbal roots conjugated in both voices), 52 The AIAF ME (vartamāne lat—the present indicative), 53

The endings of the ado (vartamāne lat), 53 The paradigms of 96 (Vvad-speak) and 499 (Vbhās speak), 55 Rules concerning verbal endings, 56 The verbal root 316L (Vas—to be), 57 Paradigm of 37 (Vas), 58 Declension: The Sanskrit noun, 59 Gender, for (linga), 59 Number, (vacana), 59 Case, fante (vibhakti), 60 The vocative, HATA (sambodhana), 61 The citation of nouns, 61 Declension of the - 31 (-a) stems, 62 Memorization of paradigms, 63 Parts of speech: the verb, f146 (kriyāpada), and the subject, the (karts), 64 Parts of speech continued: transitive and intransitive roots, सकर्मक (sakarmaka) and अकर्मक धातु-s (akarmaka dhātu-s); the direct object, 067497 (karman), 65 The cases and their functions, 66 gerhat (prathamā vibhakti —the nominative case), 66

4.38

4.39 4.40

xxiii

5.3

4.41 facit fat (dvitiyā vibhakti —the accusative case),67 4.42

SIRIH (trtīyā vibhakti —the instrumental case), 68 4.43 goo auf (sasthi vibhakti —the genitive case), 69 4.44 Word order, 70 4.45 Personal pronouns, 71 4.46 364 (aham—I); c014 (tvam—you), 71

4.47 4ra (nipāta—particles): 4 (sma); Sta (iti), 73 
### 05: FE (strilinga-Feminine) Nouns in - 371 (-ā);

चतुर्थी, पञ्चमी and सप्तमी विभक्ति-s (Caturthi, Palicami and Saptami Vibhakti-s); Demonstrative

Pronouns 5.1 Paradigm of Fiş (strilinga) nouns in -311 (ā), 79 5.2 agleff auf (caturthi vibhakti —the dative case), 80

4 4 fauts (pañcami vibhakti—the ablative case), 80 5.4 Hafa (saptami vibhakti —the locative case), 81 5.5 HAA14] (sarvanāman demonstrative pronouns), 82 5.6 The pronoun Ha (etat), 85

5.7 Adjectives of pronominal declension, 85 
### 06: Nominal Stems in-3 (-i) and -3 (-u);

Interrogative, Relative, and Correlative Clauses: The 7-4-2 (k-y-t) Series of Indeclinables and

Pronouns 6.1 पुंलिङ्ग (pumlinga), स्त्रीलिङ्ग (strilinga) and नपुंसकलिङ्ग

(napumsakalinga) paradigms in - (-i) and -3 (-u), 91 Interrogative, relative, and correlative: 7-7-7 (the k-y-t series), 95 3TOYG-s (avyayapada-s) (indeclinables of the 0-4-

[k-y-t] series), 99 6.8 The adverbs of the series, 100 6.11 Adverbs with -CT (-dā) and - (-tra), 102. 6.12 Adverbial endings added to other pronominal stems,

102 6.13

H-144 (sarvanāman-pronouns) of the 0-4-7 (k-y-t) series, 103

6.3

6.5

xxiv

6.15 6.17 6.19

6.20

6.21 
### 07:

7.9 7.12 7.14 7.15 7.16 7.17 7.18 7.19 7.20 7.21 7.22 7.23 7.25

Usage of the 7-7-a (k-y-t) series pronouns, 103 Indefinite and absolute negative constructions, 105 The interrogative with the particles 31 (api), a (cana) and facL (cit), 105

The negative particle 7 (na), 105 Negation, 106

FI-5 (strilinga-Feminine) Stems in -$ (-); The

-141-(Gaņa-s) of the Present System Paradigm of Fitos (strilinga) nouns in $ (i), 113 The present system, 113

10-s (gana-s), 114 "a" 10-s (gana-s) and "non-a" 2101-s (gaņa-s), 115 Strong and weak forms, 115 The 7-s (gana-s) of the present system, 116 The (Vbhū gana), 118 Irregular roots of the 411(Vbhū gaña), 118 Exceptions to regular Tu (guņa) strength, 119 The second, or 37 m (Vad gana), 120 Internal consonant HU (sandhi), 120 . Some examples of second | (gaña) forms, 121 Irregular roots of the 3T | (Vad gana), 122 The third, or (Vhu gaņa), 123 General rules of 37214 (abhyāsa), 124 Specific rules for the qu (Vhu gana), 124 Loss of न् (n) in the प्रथमपुरुष, बहुवचन परस्मैपद (prathama puruṣa, bahuvacana parasmai pada), 125 Irregular roots of the Z 19 (Vhu gaña), 125 The fourth, or Faq (Vdiv gana), 126 The fifth or 1 (Vsu gaña) and the eighth or (Vtan gana), 127 Rules for the (Vsu) and 10-s (Vtan gaņa-s), 127

The roots (Vkr), (Vśru), and 3119 (Vāp), 127 The sixth, or TC (Vtud gaña), 129 Roots that are strengthened in the T T (Vtud gana), 129

7.26 7.27 7.28

7.29 7.30 7.31 7.32

XXV

8.4 8.5

7.33 The seventh, or 54 70 (Vrudh gana) roots, 129 7.36 The ninth, or 71 (Vkri gaņa), 131 7.37 The root g (Vjña), 131

7.38 The tenth, or 10 (Vcur gana), 132 
### 08: Noun Stem Strength; Noun Stems in -371 (-an);

अनघ

(Anadyatana Bhūte Lan) The Imperfect; 34411-s (Upasarga-s) 8.1 Noun stem strength, 137 8.2 Noun stems in -37 (-an), 137 8.3 Strength in 371 (-an) stems, 137

Typical case endings, 138

Paradigms of -37% (-an) stems, 139 8.6 3TECA Y 5 (anadyatanabhūte lan—the

'imperfect'), 142

Formation of the 5 (lan), 142 8.9 The secondary endings of the SE (lan), 143 8.10 "a" 10-s (gana-s), 143 8.11 "non-a" Tu-s (gaņa-s), 144 8.12 3483f-s (upasarga-s-verbal prefixés), 145 8.13 Functions of the 347f-s (upasarga-s): pleonastic;

analytic; idiomatic, 145 8.15. List of the major 341-s (upasarga-s), 146

8.18 Placement of 34021-s (upasarga-s), 152 
### 09; Noun Stems in -31: (-ah); The foyer

(Karmaņi Prayoga) Noun stems in -31: (-ah), 157

Nouns ending in -3: (-uh) and -5: (-ih), 158 9.4 Important nouns of these classes, 159 9.5 The auffon pitt (karmaņi prayoga—the Sanskrit

passive'), 161 9.9 The tre (karty) and the trail getal (kartari prayoga),

162 9.10 The 247 (karman) and the after it (karmaņi prayoga),

162

9.0 9.2

XXVI

20

9.17 The HTC RIMI (bhāve prayoga-abstract construction),

163 The transformation of कर्तरि (kartari) to कर्मणि प्रयोग (karmaṇi prayoga), 164 The transformation of कर्मणि (karmani) to कर्तरि प्रयोग (kartari prayoga), 165 The formation of the HIIT (karmani prayoga) stem,

166 9.27 Exceptions to the basic rule of effor (karmaņi) stem

formation, 167 
### 10: Nominal Stems in - (-r); Verbal Adjectives;

The EGR (Bhūte Kędanta) 10.0 Kinship and adjectival agent nouns in-(-r), 173 10.1 Gender of stems in - 7 (-), 174 10.2 Declension of stems in -#(-1), 174 10.3 Paradigms of -73 (-r) stem nouns, 174 10.4 Verbal adjectives: Sanskrit participles, 176 10.5 The va G. (bhūte krdanta–past passive participle),

177

10.7 The formation of the La PGR (bhūte krdanta), 180 10.8 Sound changes of the EGR (bhūte krdanta), 181 10.9 Roots set off from the -a (-ta) ending by the vowel 3 (i),

183 10.11. The root te (Vgrah) with -a (-ta), 184

10.12 The La G (bhūte kşdanta) in - - (n), 184 
### 11: Stems in-TR (-ant); Adjectival Suffixes in - Red

(-mant) and OR (-vant); The (ktavatu) (Past Active Participle); The calm (tvānta)/CIGRI

(lyabanta) (Gerund); The OC (lot) (Imperative) 11.0 Nominal and adjectival stems in -3R7 (-ant), 191 11.1 Paradigms of stems in -371 (-ant), 191 11.2 467 (mahant) and (bhavant), 192 11.3 The suffixes -HR (-mant) and -ORT (-vant), 193 11.4 The H9 (ktavatu), past active participle, 194

XXVII

11.5 cala (tvānta) and 46 (lyabanta) (the gerund), 194 11.7 The formation of the gerund, 195 11.9 The TT (lot—the imperative), 197 11.11 The personal endings of the Te (lo:), 197 11.12 922444 (madhyamapuruşa) endings of the ITE (lot),

197 11.16 The color reitl (karmaņi prayoga) of the stę (lot), 201

11.18 The negative particle 1 (mā), 201 
### 12: Nominal Stems in -57(-in); H4TH (Samāsa)

(Nominal Composition) 12. The suffix-51 (-in), 207 12.1 Paradigms of पुंलिङ्ग (pumlinga) and नपुंसकलिङ्ग

(napumsakalinga) stems in -5% (-in), 207 12.3 HHH (samāsa—nominal composition), 208 12.6 Word order in H4TH-s (samāsa-s), 209 12.7 Analysis of H4TH-S (samāsa-s), 210 12.8 Techniques of compounding , 211 12.9 Types of #4141 (samāsa), 212 12.10 कर्मधारय (karmadhāraya) and तत्पुरुष (tatpurusa

samāsa-s), 212 12.11 HAFI (samānādhikaraṇa— case agreement), 213 12.12 The cytop 18 (tat puruşa samāsa—syntactic

compound), 214 12.13 Notes on the formation of ey (tatpuruşa) and

ART 4TH-s (karmadhāraya samāsa-s), 215 12.17 3446 44TH-s (upapada samāsa-s, "reduced word"

compounds), 219 
### 13: 945R (The Infinitive); H418 (Samāsa) Continued;

बहुव्रीहि (Bahuvrihi) Application of कर्मधारय (Karmadhāraya) and aeyo HATH-(Tatpuruṣa

Samāsa-s); The fact H4TH (Dvigu Samāsa) 13.1 Formation of the infinitive, 225 13.4 69 (bahuvrihi) application of EUR (karmadhāraya)

and 461 441H-s (tat purusa samāsa-s), 227

xxviii

13.9 Identification of credita-s (bahuvrihi-s) by contextual

criteria and formal criteria, 229 13.10 faue (vigraha) of Califa-s (bahuvrihi-s), 231 13.12 बहुव्रीहि (bahuvrihi) application of तत्पुरुष समास-s

(tatpuruşa samāsa-s), 234 13.16 The fac H41H-s (dvigu samāsa-s-compounds with an

initial numeral), 235 
### 14: HATH (Samāsa) Concluded; && (Dvandva) and

TORTA H418-s (Avyayibhāva Samāsa-s); The

fata 5 (Vidhi Lin) (Optative) 14.1 The & HTH (dvandva samāsa—'copulative

compound'), 241 14.5 The order of words in a && (dvandva), 242 14.6 Kinship terms in - * (-1) in compounds, 243 14.7 The chate && (ekaśeșa dvandva-elliptical dual),

243 14.9 The TopT95414 (avyayibhāvasamāsa—indeclinable

compound), 244 14.12 The fat fis (vidhi liñ— optative mode), 245 14.14 Mode sign of the fare foss (vidhi lin), 247 14.15 Formation of the fara fog (vidhi lin), 247

14.16 The 311R1R Poss, or the benedictive, 249 
### 15:

(Vartamāne Krdanta) (The Present Participle) 15.1 The use of the adH GRI (vartamāne krdanta), 255 15.6 Formation of the Rosa (parasmai pada) stem of the

adha G (vartamāne krdanta), 259 15.7 The आत्मनेपद (ātmanepada) stem form of the वर्तमाने

Gm (vartamāne krdanta) (-41—-māna), 262 15.11 सति सप्तमी (sati saptami) and सतः षष्ठी (satah sasthi

absolute constructions), 265 15.12 Special problems of the adH G (vartamāne

krdanta), 266

XXIX


### 16: Non-147 (Gaņa) Conjugations; 2, 125, C (Lệt, Lịñ and Lut) (Future System and the Conditional);

Soru (Kștya) (Gerundive) 16.1 e, a and 3If € (set, veț and anit) roots, 273 16.2 HNYATABA C (sāmānyabhavisyatkāle Irt—the

simple future), 274 16.3 Formation of the CC (Irt), 274 16.4 Hiftet (karmani prayoga) of the cat (Irt), 275 16.5 Internal Hau (sandhi) and the 2€ (Irt), 275 16.6 लट् (Irt) of some important roots: अनिट् (anit) and सेट

(set), 277 16.7 Illustrations of the use of the future, 278 16.8 Hacked BGA (bhavisyatkāle krdanta—future participle), 278 16.9 3 4 at 25 (ati pattau lrñ—the conditional), 279 16.10 Formation of the 25 (lrn), 279 16.11 319dH-[alfa]-Hiccupaies C (anadyatana- (svastana)

-bhavisyatkāle lut—the periphrastic future), 279 16.12 Formation of the C (lut), 279 16.13 The paradigm of 4 (Vbhū) in the (lut), 280 16.16 The "gerundive," or prescriptive passive participle,

281 16.19 Formation of the gerundive, 283 

### 17: era poc (Parokşabhūte Lit) (The Perfect);

The Perfect Participle 17.3 Use of the fear (lit), 293 17.4 Formation of the fest (lit), 294 17.6 392118 (abhyāsa—reduplication), 295 17.7 Exceptions to the rules of 3P 2H (abhyāsa), 297 17.8 Stem strength in the force (lit), 298 17.14 The foc(lis) endings, 301 17.17 Some examples of the foc (lit), 303 17.18 foc (lit) continued: the periphrastic perfect, 304 17.19 Formation of the periphrastic perfect, 304

XXX

17.23 The perfect participle, 305 
### 18: णिजन्त, सनन्त and यङन्त (Nijanta, Sannanta and

Yañanta) (Secondary Conjugations); 7144

(Nāmadhātu) (The Denominative) 18.2 Secondary conjugations, 313 18.4 POSTRI (RF) (nijanta (preraka)—the causative), 314 18.5 D-s (karty-s) of underlying roots: 37044 UTC-s

(akarmaka dhātu-s); H974 UTO-s (sakarmaka dhātu-s).

314 18.6 Formation of the USR (nijanta), 316 18.7 The rules for root-strength, 316 18.8 Forms of the USR (nijanta), 318 18.9 The present system, 318 18.10 The chilot ert (karmaņi prayoga), 319 18.11 Other formations, 320 18.12 W GR (bhūte krdanta), 320 18.13 Gerund, 321 18.14 Infinitive, 322 18.15 Gerundive, 322 18.16 2¢(Irt), 323 18.17 € (lut), 323 18.18 (lit), 323 18.19 Uses of the UTSTR (nijanta), 323 18.20 JER (sannanta—the desiderative), 324 18.22 Formation of the ER (sannanta), 325 18.24 Lt Pirt (karmaṇi prayoga) of the HER (sannanta),

329 18.25 HFR (sannanta) of forstai (nijanta), 329 18.26 457, 45% (yañanta, yañluganta—the intensive),

329 18.27 74 (nāmadhātu—the denominative), 333 18.29 Formation of the 1991 (nāmadhātu) stems, 333 18.30 Use of the 1944 (nāmadhātu), 335

XXXi


### 19: Halle (Sarvanāman) (Additional Pronouns);

Falls (Sankhyā-s) Numerals; 3ECh Tags:

(Adyatana Bhūte Luņ) The Aorist Systems 19.0 Additional pronouns, 343 19.1 अयम् (ayam), इदम् (idam), इयम (iyam), असौ (asau), अदः

(adah), 37H (asau), 343 19.3 Hal-s (sankhyā-s-numerals), 345 19.5 Cardinal numbers, 346 19.6 The declension of the adjectival numbers, 347 19.7 Ordinal numbers, 350 19.10 3ERA 5 (adyatanabhūte lun—the aorist), 351 19.12 Types of 5 (lun), 352 19.13 The simple aorist: the root-aorist, 352 19.14 The simple aorist: the 37 (a) aorist, 353 19.15 Sibilant aorists (the l(s) aorist, the 59 [is] aorist, the

the [sis] aorist and the H (sa) aorist), 353 19.16 The reduplicated aorist, 357

19.18 The injunctive, 358 
### 20: and at 4 -s (Kịt and Taddhita Pratyaya-s);

The fea 44 (Cvi Pratyaya); Nominal Derivation

and Sanskrit Vocabulary 20.2 Sanskrit derivational suffixes प्रत्यय-s (pratyaya-s); कुत्

724-s (krt pratyaya-s-primary suffixes) and are

pi-s (taddhita pratyaya-s-secondary suffixes), 367 20.4 Major 2-s (krt pratyaya-s), 368 20.8 cm (taddhita) derivation, 377 20.9 Derivative adjectives; abstract nouns, 377 20.11 The most important cap -s (taddhita pratyaya-s),

379 20.12 The Fed Type (cvi pratyaya), 388 20.13 Examples of the use of various 24-s (pratyaya-s),

390

Xxxii
### 21: Additional Consonantal Stem Formations; Stems

with Final HYA (Samyukta) Vowels; Some Irregu lar Nominal Declensions; Declension of the Com parative Suffix H/9: (Yāms/Yah) Some Remarks

on Adverbial Formation 21.0

Nouns ending in simple consonants, 401 21.1 Paradigms of वाक् (vak); शस्त्रभृत् (Sastrabhrt); विश्वसृट्

(viśvasri), 401 21.2 Paradigm of stems in (samyukta) vowels: (nau),

402 21.3 Irregular declensions: Ha (sakhi); qfa: (patih); 371 (akși);

42 (panthan); J (go); 480 (maghavan); 367 (ahan);

Eft: (dhih), 402 21.4

The comparative suffix - JH / -4: (-yams/yah), 405 21.5

3TORIU-s (avyayapada-s) adverbial formation, 406 21.6

Adverbial suffixes: -:(-tah), - OC (-vat), -ET (-dhā), - 7: (-sah); 7 (sup) endings that are stereotyped as adverbial markers, 406 
### 22: Readings from the Valmiki Rāmāyaṇa, 419 

### Glossary
GLOSSARY OF GRAMMATICAL TERMS, 429 SANSKRIT-ENGLISH GLOSSARY, 435 ENGLISH-SANSKRIT GLOSSARY, 497 INDEX, 525

xxxiii

## Caution
Goldman uses a transliteration which confounds ocr tools when it comes to ṅ.