+++
title = "Orality to writing"
+++

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and  Interpretation of Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī  

MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

## 1. Emergence of writing
1. Emergence of writing in ancient India and Pāṇini’s knowledge  and /or use of writing 

During the last two decades, extensive research has appeared dealing  with the origin of scripts in ancient India, and the chief participants in  this research, namely Harry FALK, Oskar von HINÜBER, and Richard  SALOMON, have not only discussed the question of the origin of  Kharoṣṭhī and Brāhmī script, but have also considered available literary  references in the ancient Indian literature that have been taken by the  various authorities to infer an awareness of the art of writing. This  includes references in the Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini. Pāṇini knows the word  lipi, which conventionally refers to script, and teaches (cf. P. 3.2.21)  the formation of the term lipikara, along with libikara, both presumably  in the sense of scribes or writers. In another rule (cf. P. 4.1.49), Pāṇini  teaches the derivation of the feminine formation yavanānī, and according  to Kātyāyana’s Vārttika (yavanāl lipyām), this formation refers to the  script of the Yavanas. Oskar von HINÜBER (1989: 57) suggests the  meaning of “painter” for the term lipikara, but given the later Sanskrit  use of lipi in the sense of script, and the Old Persian cognate dipi in the  same sense, it seems most likely that Pāṇini was aware of some form  of script used in his vicinity. The most likely scripts in the vicinity are  Aramaic and Greek, attested in Aśokan inscriptions in the Gandhāran  area, shortly after Pāṇini. While there seems to be an emerging  consensus that Brāhmī is a Mauryan invention, it appears that there  may have been earlier forms of Kharoṣṭhī in existence in that area for  some time before the Mauryas, and, while there is no direct evidence to support this claim, Pāṇini may have been familiar with some of these  early forms of Kharoṣṭhī, along with awareness of scripts like Aramaic  and Greek. Richard SALOMON (1998: 11ff) has reviewed the earlier  debate regarding Pāṇini’s awareness of some form of script, and he sees  “no reason to rule out Kharoṣṭhī which therefore may well date back  to the mid-fourth century B.C. or quite possibly even earlier” (p. 13).  However, even if we were to assume that some earlier form of Kharoṣṭhī  was known to Pāṇini, based on our knowledge of the earliest attested  forms of this script we can conclude that such an early form of Kharoṣṭhī  would only be approximate orthography (e.g., geminates represented  by single consonants, vowel length left unmarked) for Sanskrit, and  would be largely inadequate to capture the complex oral features of  Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī. In a personal communication to me, SALOMON  says: “Anyway, by the time of Patañjali, i.e. 2nd century B.C. (?), neither  Brāhmī and Kharoṣṭhī had developed the sort of refinements that would  permit the texts concerned to be recorded in full detail – or rather, that  is how it looks on the basis of the epigraphic record, which however is  no doubt far from the whole story – it is merely the part of the story that  we have, and a rather sparsely documented one for this period for that  matter. I find it quite plausible that by Patañjali’s time Sanskrit could  be written quite adequately, though probably not perfectly, in either  script”. SALOMON appropriately reminds us that even the later scripts  do not represent Pāṇini’s metalanguage perfectly. 

Among the Pāṇinian scholars, the early Indologists Max MÜLLER,  WEBER, ROTH and GOLDSTÜCKER engaged in a long debate on  whether Pāṇini not only knew writing, but whether Pāṇini’s grammar  would even be possible without some form of writing. GOLDSTÜCKER  especially saw signs of writing everywhere in Pāṇini’s grammar. Not  only does he refer to Pāṇini’s rules providing for the derivations of  lipikara and yavanānī, he sees allusions to writing in Pāṇini’s use of  forms of the root dṛś “to see” to refer to linguistic phenomena such as  deletion (cf. lopa “deletion” defined as adarśana “becoming invisible”,  P. 1.1.60 (adarśanaṃ lopaḥ), and he understands Pāṇini’s term grantha  (cf. P. 4.3.87, adhikṛtya kṛte granthe) as referring to written texts.  GOLDSTÜCKER even asserts (1860, 1965: 57): “His [=Pāṇini’s] third  and last mode [of indicating an adhikāra] consists in putting the sign  of a svarita – which was not intended for pronunciation”. There are  few takers today for GOLDSTÜCKER’s interpretations, but that does  not violate a judicious assumption that Pāṇini was most likely familiar  with some form of early writing, and that, as suggested by scholars like SALOMON, such an early form of writing was in all probability  seriously inadequate to render into writing all the complex details of  Pāṇini’s oral metalanguage built into the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. Among  modern scholars of Pāṇini, SCHARFE (2009) has argued this case in  great detail. After a detailed investigation, SCHARFE concludes (2009:  29-30): “We might speculate that he used such writing, inadequate as it  was, to help in organizing his material; but it is hard to imagine that his  grammar could have been written down adequately. The grammar was  passed on orally, with pitch accents and nasalized vowel tags (along  with consonantal tags) added on as markers. A svarita accent marked  an adhikāra “heading”, and roots were marked in the Dhātupāṭha with  udātta, anudātta or svarita accents to indicate various peculiar features.  Vowels that served as indicative tags (anubandha or, in Pāṇini’s  terminology, it) were nasalized. None of these articulative features  have survived in our text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. If a written form of the  grammar was handed down along with the oral transmission, it would  have played a secondary role in backing up the student’s memory.  There is no way in which the pitch accents and nasalization could have  been indicated”.1 While I agree with much of SCHARFE’s analysis and  conclusions, in what follows, I would like to present a critical survey  of how the Pāṇinian tradition responded to the inadequately transmitted  text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, and how the ambiguities in the text were used as  opportunities for attempts to tweak the statements of grammar to derive  perceived advantages. I will also show that in spite of the dedicated  efforts of the traditional commentators, certain textual ambiguities  ultimately cannot be resolved, and that modern efforts to re-engineer  an accented text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī do not necessarily take us back to a  historical reality.[^2] 

[^1]: Also see: SCHARFE (2009: 31): “Did Kātyāyana still have an oral tradition  of the accents (svara) and nasalized tags (anubandha), when he in his vārttika 13 on  I 3 1 demanded the recitation of the root list (dhātu-pāṭha) to show these technical  accents and tags? Or did he only know a Dhātupāṭha in a form similar to the one  now commonly attached to the Siddhāntakaumudī, where groups of roots are called  “accented and having unaccented tags” etc., i.e. where the inherent characterization  by recitation has been replaced by verbal description?” 

[^2]: There are several other issues relating to the transmission of the text of the  Aṣṭādhyāyī that I am not going to discuss in this paper. For a spectrum of these  issues such as interpolations, inconsistencies, textual criticism, etc., see: SCHARFE  (1971), BIRWÉ (1958), AKLUJKAR (1983), WITZEL (1986) and (2007), and  BRONKHORST (2008) and (2009); also many publications of S.D. JOSHI and  ROODBERGEN discussing their idea that several major sections of the Aṣṭādhyāyī such as the Taddhitas, compounds, and the Vedic rules may have been later additions.  For comprehensive bibliographical references and critical reviews, see CARDONA  (1976) and (1999).


60 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

## 2. Two well-known principles
2. Two well-known principles stated by the Kāśikāvṛtti 

The two most well known maxims oft-quoted in Pāṇinian  commentarial literature are (a) pratijñānunāsikyāḥ pāṇinīyāḥ, and (b)  pratijñāsvaritāḥ pāṇinīyāḥ. The first maxim is found in the Kāśikāvṛtti  on P.1.3.2 (upadeśe ’j anunāsika it). This rule says that nasal vowels (ac)  found in the grammatical elements provided by Pāṇini are designated  as it “marker sounds”. For example, the verb root edh is presumed to  have been given by Pāṇini in his root-list (dhātupāṭha) as édhã, where  the first vowel is Udātta, but non-nasal, while the second vowel is  Anudātta and nasal. The nasality of the vowel indicates that this is a  marker sound. The Anudātta vowel as a marker indicates that this root  takes Ātmanepada endings (cf. P.1.3.12, anudāttaṅita ātmanepadam).  Referring to this phenomenon of a nasal vowel as a marker, the  Kāśikāvṛtti says: pratijñānunāsikyāḥ pāṇinīyāḥ “For the Pāṇinians,  nasality (of vowels) is recognized (only) by asserted convention  (pratijñā)”. This statement is also found in some manuscripts of the  Paribhāṣāpāṭha attributed to Vyāḍi (Paribhāṣāsaṃgraha: 42), though it  is not found in the Paribhāṣāsūcana attributed to the same author. This  statement can be read as the admission by the Pāṇinian tradition that  the nasal vowels were not identifiably available in the transmitted text  of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, and their presence is recognized only secondarily on  the basis of assertions of authorities like Kātyāyana and Patañjali. 

P.1.3.11 (svaritenādhikāraḥ) says that an expression marked with a  Svarita accent continues to be read in the subsequent rules. For example,  the word pratyayaḥ in P.3.1.1 is continued in hundreds of subsequent  rules. Referring to this phenomenon, the Kāśikāvṛtti on this rule says:  pratijñāsvaritāḥ pāṇinīyāḥ “For the Pāṇinians, the Svarita accent [on  grammatical expressions provided in the rules] is recognized (only) by  asserted convention (pratijñā)”. This is also found in some manuscripts  of Vyāḍi’s Paribhāṣāpāṭha (Paribhāṣāsaṃgraha, p. 42), but is not found  in the Paribhāṣāsūcana attributed to Vyāḍi. This statement can also be  read as an admission by the Pāṇinian tradition that such a marking with  a Svarita accent was not identifiable in the received text of Pāṇini’s  Aṣṭādhyāyī, and the presence of such Svarita marker vowels can only be  recognized from the conventional teaching of grammatical authorities.  While we are unsure if the exact wording of these two maxims pre 


From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 61 

dates the Kāśikāvṛtti, the message of these two statements is in accord  with what one finds in the oldest commentators of Pāṇini’s grammar,  namely Kātyāyana and Patañjali. 

## 3. Textual issues going back to Kātyāyana and Patañjali 

As we have noted at the beginning, even if we assume that Pāṇini  knew an early form of Kharoṣṭhī and even if we assume that he used it  to write down his Aṣṭādhyāyī, the written text would be substantially  inadequate to represent the complex oral features of the text of the  Aṣṭādhyāyī. It would not be able to represent vowel length, geminates,  and, we can almost be certain, not be able to represent accents or  nasality of vowels. Coming down to Kātyāyana and Patañjali, one may  assume that they were familiar with some form of Brāhmī. However,  as SCHARFE (2009: 44) correctly notes, “The new script noted the  proper lengths of vowels and allowed somewhat better writing of  consonant clusters. But there were no signs for pitch accents or most  nasalizations”. SCHARFE further notes, “Many Vedic texts lost their  accentuation when they were eventually written down and their oral  transmission was interrupted; those Vedic texts that are showing  accents and nasalizations use signs that are post-Pāṇinian, probably  even very much later than Pāṇini. We must assume that Kātyāyana  and Patañjali similarly received an imperfect tradition: a written text  without accents and technical nasalizations, without definite sentence  breaks, aided perhaps by some limited instruction on how the rules are  to be applied”.3 While we have no direct access to the original oral  text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī as composed by Pāṇini, nor do we possess  manuscripts of the Aṣṭādhyāyī going back to Pāṇini, a careful review  of the grammatical works of Kātyāyana and Patañjali give us ample  clues about the state of the text as they received. Given the fact that  they come from the post-Aśokan period, and from a relatively southern  and eastern region of India as compared to Pāṇini’s homeland in the  northwestern corner of the sub-continent, one would have to assume  that they were familiar with some form of Brāhmī writing, and yet their  works do not make any reference to a written form of the Aṣṭādhyāyī.  

[^3]: Also see, SCHARFE (2009: 66-69): “The written sign for pluta vowels is  attested only rather late and was not available, when Pāṇini’s grammar was first  written down....One has to wonder, how the nasalized semivowels in Mahābhāṣya  vol. I, p.16, would have been written in the early Brāhmī script”. 

62 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

We can infer from their discussions that several important oral features  of the Aṣṭādhyāyī were already lost in the text they had received, and  that they could not rely on either oral or written sources to recover  information about these lost features.4 

## 4. Explicit pro-orality assertions
4. Explicit pro-orality assertions from Pāṇini to Patañjali 

Kātyāyana and Patañjali make no reference to a written form of  Pāṇini’s grammar, nor do they explicitly bring in any consideration of  the written form of language. Patañjali explains that the language or  a linguistic expression is a form of sound or sound-sequence that is  received by the ear, manifested by the use of a speaker, discerned by the  intellect of the listener, and in essence is a segment or a feature of ākāśa “space”, which is traditionally believed to be the medium for sound.5 Among the alternatives discussed by Kātyāyana and Patañjali regarding  the sounds of Sanskrit as they are listed in the Śivasūtras, there is a  proposal that the sounds as listed in the Śivasūtras, e.g. a i u (ṇ), stand for  a generic phonetic shape that covers all variants that share this generic  phonetic shape. For example, the sound a as taught in the Śivasūtra a i  u (ṇ) refers to all eighteen varieties that differ in the features of accents,  quantity and nasality. Patañjali uses the expression avarṇākṛtir upadiṣṭā “the generic phonetic shape of a that is taught [in the first Śivasūtra]”6 and the term upadeśa is explained by him clearly as referring to the  act of pronunciation (diśir uccāraṇakriyaḥ)7. 

[^4]: There are some features that cannot be written down even with our currently  available scripts like Devanāgarī. For instance, the final rule of the Aṣṭādhyāyī  (P.8.4.68) is simply stated as a a. The rule teaches the replacement of an open a by  a close a, as it is actually found in the usage of Sanskrit. Within the grammatical  derivation, the short a is treated as an open sound, so that it can become homogenous  (savarṇa) with ā, which is an open sound. There has been no written representation  of the distinction between an open and a close a. We understand the distinction only  from the commentarial discussions. 

5 śrotropalabdhir buddhinirgrāhyaḥ prayogeṇābhijvalita ākāśdeśaḥ śabdaḥ /,  Mahābhāṣya, vol. 1:87 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). 

6 Vārttika 39: ākṛtigrahaṇāt siddham, and Patañjali: avarṇākṛtir upadiṣṭā  sarvam avarṇakulaṃ grahīṣyati, tathevarṇākṛtiḥ tathovarṇākṛtiḥ / Mahābhāṣya, vol.  1:88 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). 

7 diśir uccāraṇakriyaḥ  / uccārya hi varṇān āhopadiṣṭā ime varṇā iti  /,  Mahābhāṣya, vol. 1:72 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). Bhartṛhari says that unless the Svarita  accent is pronounced, how else can it be indicated, cf. Mahābhāṣyadīpikā: 231:  anuccāryamāṇe aśakyaḥ svaritāsaṅgaḥ /.


There is no reference to  writing of these sounds, though one may observe the historical fact that  at least the early forms of Kharoṣṭhī did not distinguish vowel length in  writing, and that there is some interesting correspondence in the patterns  of representing vowels seen in Pāṇini’s Śivasūtras and the features of  early Kharoṣṭhī. Pāṇini, Kātyāyana and Patañjali use visual terminology  to refer to oral phenomena. For example, the term rūpa “form” refers to  the phonetic form, and the term sarūpa “with the same form” refers to  words that share the same phonetic form.8 In Kātyāyana’s terminology,  the sounds a and ā share the same ākṛti “common form” or rūpa “form  or shape”.9 Certain expressions are seen or not seen (dṛṣṭa, dṛśyate)10 in  the world, and in saying such things the grammarians are using visual  language to refer to observation of oral phenomena. The deletion of a  grammatical item (lopa) is defined by Pāṇini as adarśana “invisibility” of that item (P.1.1.60). The context makes it quite clear that these are  phonetic “seeings” or observations of phonetic facts, and do not imply  a hidden reference to writing as claimed by GOLDSTÜCKER. One  may wonder as to why Pāṇini uses adarśana “not seeing” rather than  aśravaṇa “not hearing” to refer to the phenomenon of deletion. One may  possibly suspect that the presence of the script in the environment of  Pāṇini, Kātyāyana and Patañjali encouraged such a usage of the visual  language to refer to oral expressions, but at the same time, we must  recognize the strict stand of orality assumed by these grammarians.  References to a seer seeing a hymn in his trance-like state abound in  earlier literature going all the way back to the Ṛgveda. Patañjali quotes  a verse from the Ṛgveda (1.71.4a: uta tvaḥ paśyan na dadarśa vācam  uta tvaḥ śṛṇvan na śṛṇoty enām) which says that a common person,  though capable of seeing, does not see the mysterious speech, nor  does a person capable of hearing hear it. But a Vedic sage is said to  see a hymn or a song (sāman), and the word ṛṣi “sage” is derived by  Yāska from the root ḍṛś “to see” (Nirukta 2.11: ṛṣir darśanāt). Pāṇini  also refers to a Sāman or a Vedic song being seen by a sage (P.4.2.7:  dṛṣṭaṃ sāma), while other texts are referred to as spoken by someone  (P.4.3.101: tena proktam), but there is no explicit category of written  language. This tells us that we need to be very careful in interpreting  the visual terminology used by Pāṇini and others to refer to linguistic  phenomena, and not immediately infer a reference to written language. 

[^8]: Cf. P.1.1.68 (svaṃ rūpaṃ śabdasyāśabdasaṃjñā) and P.1.2.64 (sarūpāṇām  ekaśeṣa ekavibhaktau). 

[^9]: Mahābhāṣya, Vol I:89 (Nirṇayasāgara edn): Vārttika 41: rūpasāmānyād vā. 10 The verb dṛś is used to refer to observed usage in P.3.2.178, P.3.3.130,  P.3.2.75, P.6.3.137, P.3.2.101, etc.

64 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

Here is Patañjali’s description of how Pāṇini composed his  grammar: “The authoritative teacher, holding the sacred darbha grass  in his hand and sitting in a clean/pure (śuci) place facing the east,  produced the rules of his grammar with great effort. As such, it is not  possible that even a single sound would be worthless, let alone a whole  rule”.11 In this imagined description of Pāṇini, there is no scope for  written language. Pāṇini’s grammar was part of the Vedic tradition,  and Patañjali gives a graphic description of how a mistake of accent  was handled by a teacher. On P.1.1.1 (vṛddhir ādaic), Kātyāyana says  that the sound ā has a marker t attached to it so that, by rule P.1.1.70  (taparas tatkālasya), it can stand for its homogeneous varieties of the  same length, but different in accent and nasality. This must be so, since  properties like accent and nasality are distinctive, and without a special  effort, one instance of ā will not stand for another instance of ā differing  in accent or nasality.12 Patañjali further inquires into what is meant by  distinctiveness of accent and nasality of a vowel: “The accents like  Udātta are distinctive. How do we know that accents like Udātta are  distinctive? This is what we see in the world. When a student (reciting  the Vedic texts) utters an Anudātta accent, where he needs to utter the  Udātta accent, the teacher of that Vedic text slaps him, saying: ʻYou  are doing something different’ ”.13 Here the context is quite clear. The  Vedic texts are taught and learned entirely in the context of orality,  and the text of Pāṇini is being interpreted within such an educational  atmosphere. The fact of writing, known to us from other sources, is  in the deep background, unacknowledged and perhaps unappreciated,  while orality is in the foreground of this educational setup. The presence  of writing in the deep cultural background is also inferable from the  inclusion of likhita-pāṭhaka “one who reads from a written text” among  the six worst Vedic reciters in the Sarvasammata-Śikṣā (verse 36).14 

11 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 143 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): pramāṇabhūta ācāryo  darbhapavitrapāṇiḥ śucāv avakāśe prāṅmukha upaviśya mahatā prayatnena sūtrāṇi  praṇayati sma  / tatrāśakyaṃ varṇenāpy anarthakena bhavitum, kim punar iyatā  sūtreṇa / 

12 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 152 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): Vārttika 1 on P. 1.1.1 (ākārasya  taparakaraṇaṃ savarṇārtham), Vt. 2 (bhedakatvāt svarasya), Vt. 3 (bhedakatvād  guṇasya). 

13 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 152 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): bhedakā udāttādayaḥ / kathaṃ  punar jñāyate bhedakā udāttādaya iti? evaṃ hi dṛśyate loke  – ya udātte kartavye  ’nudāttaṃ karoti khaṇḍikopādhyāyas tasmai capeṭāṃ dadāti, anyat tvaṃ karoṣīti / 14 Cited by W.S. ALLEN (1953: 16, fn. 4): gītī śīghrī śiraḥkampī tathā likhita pāṭhakaḥ / anarthajño ’lpakaṇṭhaś ca ṣaḍ ete pāṭhakādhamāḥ //. While “one reading  from a written text” is included among the worst reciters, along with “one who does 

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 65 

We don’t know the date of this text, but even assuming that attempts to  write down the Vedic and ancillary texts were being made at the time  of Kātāyana and Patañjali, their orthodox preference for orality would  have left such written versions in the realm of unappreciated and unused  materials. Later I would return to possible signs for the impact of the  presence of writing in the cultural background of the grammarians. 

## 5. Traisvarya or Ekaśruti Pāṭha
5. Traisvarya or Ekaśruti Pāṭha for the Śivasūtras & the Aṣṭādhyāyī 

In order to figure out the form in which the Śivasūtras and the  Aṣṭādhyāyī were known to Pāṇinian commentators, we will review  certain important discussions. These discussions simultaneously  reveal uncertainty regarding the form of these texts as known to these  commentators, but they also reveal how these commentators are trying  their best to come to terms with the fact of uncertainty by proposing  different alternative possibilities, and evaluating those possibilities in  terms of their feasibility, as well as the benefits that may or may not  be derived from those alternative reconstructions. The famous maxim  repeated often by Patañjali says: vyākhyānato viśeṣapratipattir na tu  sandehād alakṣaṇam – “Clarity on specific points may be reached on  the basis of traditional explanation, and there is no reason to assume the  rules to be ineffective due to the presence of doubt”.15 This statement  of Patañjali reveals the two sides of the situation. While admitting the  fact of doubts regarding many points, the tradition pushes ahead with  explanations to overcome the uncertainty created by those doubts.  Therefore, we need to reconstruct the nature of these doubts as well as  the attempts of the tradition attempts to get over these doubts through  imaginative and purposeful reconstructions of Pāṇini’s text. 

What was the nature of the oral texts of the Śivasūtras and the  Aṣṭādhyāyī as known to Kātyāyana and Patañjali, and then to the  subsequent commentators? Let us first consider the question of the  sounds as they are listed in the Śivasūtras. While the Śivasūtras list most  of the consonants of Sanskrit, among the vowels, they do not list long or  prolonged varieties of simple vowels, nor do they list variants of these  

not understand the meaning” (anarthajña), the remaining four worst reciters are all  within the realm of orality: gītī “one who makes a sing-song recitation”, śīghrī “one  who (unneccesarily) hastens the recitation”, śiraḥkampī “one who shakes his head”,  and alpakaṇṭha “one who has a weak throat”. While the negatively rated presence  of writing in the background is admitted, most of the criticism is launched at the  performers of oral recitation. 

15 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 57 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.).

66 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

vowels that differ in accents (i.e. Udātta, Anudātta, and Svarita), nor do  they list vowels with nasality. All these unlisted varieties of Sanskrit  sounds are desirable to be made known by the grammar, and, keeping  this in mind, Kātyāyana says that if the purpose of the Śivasūtra listings  is to make known all the desirable sounds of Sanskrit, then one must  list simple vowels that are long and prolonged as well as sounds as they  have the three different accents and nasality.16 If this is what Kātyāyana  is demanding to be done, this implies that the sounds of the Śivasūtras  as they were received did not include any of these distinctions. Kaiyaṭa  on this Vārttika understands this statement to imply that the received  version of the Śivasūtras was given in ekaśruti “monotone”, and hence  all the three accent distinctions of Udātta, Anudātta, and Svarita must  be expressly listed separately.17 Nāgeśa disagrees with Kaiyaṭa’s  understanding of Kātyāyana’s proposal. Nāgeśa also believes that  Kaiyaṭa is proposing that, not only the Śivasūtras, but the entire text of  the Aṣṭādhyāyī is originally given in ekaśruti “monotone”. In Nāgeśa’s  own opinion, the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, as well as the Śivasūtras,  is given with all three accents (traisvarya). Now, assuming that the  Śivasūtras are given with three accents, why would Kātyāyana propose  that one must make an explicit listing of vowels with all three accents and  nasality? Nāgeśa’s answer is that when we assume that the vowels of the  Śivasūtras are given with accents, that simply means that a given vowel  will have one of the three possible accents, and the varieties with other  two accents will still have to be listed. Even when we admit that Pāṇini  provided vowels in the Śivasūtras with accents, we don’t quite know  which of the three accents he used, and hence Kātyāyana’s proposal  for listing varieties with all three accents is still justified.18 Vaidyanātha  Pāyaguṇḍe, commenting on Nāgeśa’s Uddyota, agrees with his teacher  that the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī is nowhere found in monotone (ekaśruti),  and that this is the final verdict (siddhāntamata).19 

16 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 73 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): Vārttika 20 on the Śivasūtras  says: iṣṭabuddhyarthaś ceti ced udāttānudāttasvaritānunāsikadīrghaplutānām apy  upadeśaḥ / 

17 Kaiyaṭa’s Pradīpa says: ekaśrutyā his sūtrāṇāṃ pāṭhāt sarveṣāṃ udāttādīnāṃ  upadeśaḥ kartavya ity āha, Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 73 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). 18 Nāgeśa’s Uddyota says: traisvaryapāṭhe tu dvayor eva kartavyatāṃ vaded  ity arthaḥ  /... traisvaryeṇa pāṭhe ’pi anyatarapāṭhe ’nyasya kartavyatvābhiprāyeṇa  sarveṣāṃ grahaṇam ity anye, Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 73 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). 19 Vaidyanātha’s Chāyā: nanu traisvaryeṇaiva pāṭho naikaśrutyā aṣṭādhyāyyāḥ  kvāpi tathā pāṭho ’thāpi kathaṃ dṛṣṭāntenātreṣṭasādhanam ataḥ siddhantamatam āha,  Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 73 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). For a critique of Nāgeśa’s view, seeFrom Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 67 

We may note that the Vedic reciters who recite the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī today recite  it with the three accents (traisvarya), and that Vaidyanātha may be  referring to such observed recitation. Later we will take a look at the  received accented recitation of the Aṣṭādhyāyī by the Vaidika reciters.  On the other hand, it is possible that Kaiyaṭa, perhaps coming from a  different region like Kashmir, was not aware of the accented recitation  of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. Probably, he knew the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī only  in monotone, and hence he proposed the explicit listing of all varieties  differing in three accents, and nasality, and that these features were  deemed to be distinctive (bhedakaguṇa).20 

Patañjali, on the other hand, seems to advocate a contrary position.21 After reviewing both the positions that the features like accents and  nasality were distinctive or non-distinctive, Patañjali’s verdict is that  they are non-distinctive. What Patañjali means to say is that whatever  features of accent and nasality that appear in the received oral text of  the Aṣṭādhyāyī by sheer necessity, in the sense that one cannot utter  a sound without some of these features, these features as articulated  are not intentionally meant. To prove his point, Patañjali cites P.7.1.75  (asthidadhisakthyakṣṇām anaṅ udāttaḥ). This rule prescribes the  substitute an(aṅ) for the final i of the nominal stems asthi etc., but it  explicitly says that this substitute is Udātta (anaṅ udāttaḥ). Patañjali’s  point is that if the accents as uttered in the oral text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī  were intentional, Pāṇini could have simply uttered this substitute  with the Udātta accent (án), and there would be no need for Pāṇini  to explicitly say in words that this substitute is Udātta. This is a very  important argument, and it transcends the question of whether the text  of the Aṣṭādhyāyī was written down or was purely oral. Patañjali’s  argument would lead us to the heart of Pāṇini’s own composition of the  

Yudhiṣṭhira MĪMĀṂSAKA (1973: 229). He supports Kaiyaṭa’s ekaśruti view. 20 This also appears to be the understanding of Bhartṛhari, see Mahābhāṣyadīpikā:  iṣtabuddhyarthaś ca varṇānām upadeśaḥ  / upadeśe his sati yathābhūtā uccāritās  tathābhūtāḥ sādhavo viparītāḥ tv asādhava iti sādhutvapratipattyartham api kartavya  upadeśa iti / udāttādīnām apy upadeśaḥ kartavyaḥ / ete hi varṇā ekaśrutyā paṭhitāḥ /. 21 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 153 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): (ākṣepabhāṣyam) ubhayam  idaṃ guṇeṣūktam - bhedakāḥ, abhedakā iti / kim punar atra nyāyyam? (siddhānta samādhāna-bhāṣyam) abhedakā guṇā ity eva nyāyyam  / kuta etat? yad ayam  “asthidadhisakthy-akṣṇām anaṅ udāttaḥ” ity udātta-grahaṇaṃ karoti, taj jñāpayaty  ācāryo ’bhedakā guṇā iti / yadi hi bhedakā guṇāḥ syuḥ, udāttam evoccārayet /. Of the  two views discussed by Patañjali, the tradition seems to take the abhedakā guṇāḥ as  his final view, and this appears as an acknowledged Paribhāṣā in several works, cf.  Paribhāṣāsaṃgraha.

68 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

Aṣṭādhyāyī. Pāṇini’s explicit prescription for the Udātta accent of the  substitute an can possibly mean either that the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī  was basically given in monotone (ekaśruti), and that special accent  markings had to be explicitly stated, or that the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī  was given with some normal accentuation of Sanskrit, and yet whenever  Pāṇini wanted to ensure a specific accentuation, he needed to make it  explicit, because the normal accentuation of the sūtras could not assure  the desired result. The explicit prescription of Udātta can thus be seen  as overriding the normal accent patterns. Kaiyaṭa on this passage of the  Mahābhāṣya explores both the alternatives. Even if one assumes that the  sūtras of the Aṣṭādhyāyī were accented like normal Sanskrit, the very  normality of these accents would make them unintentional (avivakṣita),  and hence by the normal rules of substitution, one could get some other  accent for the substitute an for the final i of the listed words. In the present  case, the stem is originally accented as ásthi, which makes the final i  sound an Anudātta sound. Unless explicitly stated, as P 7.1.75 does, the  substitute an for the Anudātta i would naturally become Anudātta (cf.  P.1.1.50: sthāne ’ntaratamaḥ), because the substitute closely copies the  features of its original. Thus, Kaiyaṭa says that we would need such  explicit specifications of accents and nasality, whether we assume that  the Aṣṭādhyāyī carried the natural accents (traisvarya) of Sanskrit that  were unintentional, or if we assume that the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī was  basically in monotone (ekaśruti).22 Nāgeśa, commenting on Kaiyaṭa,  prefers the first alternative, namely that the Aṣṭādhyāyī carried the  normal accents (traisvarya), with occasional segments in monotone  (ekaśruti), and he rejects the assumption that the entire Aṣṭādhyāyī  was produced by Pāṇini in monotone. On the other hand, he also  says that students recited the Aṣṭādhyāyī (and other Vedāṅgas) in his  days in monotone, like the accentless texts of the Brāhmaṇas. But this  condition of monotone recitation did not reflect the original state of the  Aṣṭādhyāyī.23 But underlying this assertion of Nāgeśa of an Aṣṭādhyāyī  

22 Pradīpa on Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 153 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): yady evaṃ katham  anyatroktam “udātta-nipātanaṃ kariṣyata” iti, yāvatā tatrāpy avivakṣā prāpnoti  /  naiṣa doṣaḥ, tatrāpi sthānentaratamavacanād ādeśasya yaḥ svaraḥ prāptaḥ tasminn  uccārayitavya udāttoccāraṇam prayatnena vivakṣārthaṃ vijñāyate / evam anunāsikasya  prayatnādhikyenoccāraṇaṃ tad vivakṣārtham eva / uñaḥ ūṃ iti yathā / anye tv āhuḥ -  ekaśrutyā sūtrāṇi paṭhyanta iti kvacid udāttoccāraṇam tad vivakṣārtham iti / 

23 Uddyota on Pradīpa on Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 153 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): anye  tv ity arucibījam... sampūrṇāṣṭādhyāyī ācāryeṇaikaśrutyā paṭhitety atra na mānam /  kvacit kasyacit padasyaikaśrutyā pāṭho yathā dāṇḍināyanādisūtre aikṣvāketi / etāvad  eva bhāṣyāl labhyate / yady apy adhyetāra ekaśrutyaivāṅgāni paṭhanti brāhmaṇavat, 

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 69 

text with normal accents of Sanskrit is the assumption that such normal  accents of this text were not intentional, and that they would not become  operative in grammatical derivations without explicit statements such  as the one found in P.7.1.75. 

To get a sense of the uncertainty of accent markings in the received  text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, let us consider issues raised by Pāṇini’s rule  1.1.70 (taparas tatkālasya). The previous rule (P. 1.1.69: aṇ-udit  savarṇasya cāpratyayaḥ) says that the aṇ sounds [= a, i, u, ṛ, ḷ, e,  o, ai, au, [h], y, v, [r] and l, as listed in the first six Śivasūtras] and  sounds marked with a marker u stand for themselves and the class of  their homogeneous sounds [savarṇa, cf. P.1.1.9: tulyāsyaprayatnaṃ  savarṇam], if they are not pratyayas “affixes”. Thus, for example, a  non-affixal i stands for the class of eighteen homogeneous sounds that  share the same point of articulation (sthāna) and internal articulatory  effort (prayatna), but differ in length [short, long, prolonged], accents  [Udātta, Anudātta, Svarita] and nasality [nasal or non-nasal]. In P.1.1.1  (vṛddhir ādaic), the vowels ā [= āt] and ai and au [= aic] are given  the designation Vṛddhi. What is the reason for attaching the marker  t to ā, and also perhaps to aic as well? P.1.1.70 (taparas tatkālasya)  explains the function of the marker t. It says that a t(a)-para sound  stands only for the homogeneous varieties of the same length. How to  interpret the expression t(a)-para in this rule?24 While the interpretation  of this expression as a Bahuvrīhi compound in the sense “that which  is followed by t” fits most contexts in Pāṇini’s rules, and is applicable  to the expression āt in P.1.1.1, Patañjali argues that the expression  aic [= ai and au] in this rule that follows t [cf. ā-t-aic] also needs to  be treated as being tapara. To get the sense “that which follows t”,  Patañjali derives it as a Tatpuruṣa compound.25 We will not discuss  here the reasons why Patañjali feels the need to interpret tapara both as  a Bahuvrīhi as well as a Tatpuruṣa. Would such a double interpretation,  or alternative interpretations, be possible if Patañjali had access to a  genuinely accented text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī? That seems unlikely. As  

tathāpi vyākhyānato ’nunāsikatvādivad udāttanipātanādijñānam ity āhuḥ / 24 In DESHPANDE (1972), I have discussed in detail this question and  concluded that the expression tapara in this rule historically can only mean “a sound  that is followed by the marker t.” 

25 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 101 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): tapare guṇavṛddhī / nanu ca  taḥ paro yasmāt so ’yaṃ taparaḥ / nety āha, tād api paras tapara iti /. Patañjali’s  comment extends to both aic [in P.1.1.1] and eṅ [in P.1.1.2] where these expressions  follow the marker t. Compare Siddhāntakaumudī on P. 1.1.70 (p. 9): taḥ paro yasmāt  sa ca tāt paraś ca uccāryamāṇasamakālasyaiva saṃjñā syāt /.

70 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

Patañjali himself has noted, change of accent can decide whether an  expression is a Bahuvrīhi or a Tatpuruṣa. A Tatpuruṣa compound has  its final syllable Udātta, while in a Bahuvrīhi, the first member of the  compound retains its Udātta.26 Had the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī been fully  accented, if the word tapara was ādyudātta [= tápara], it would then  be a Bahuvrīhi, but if it were an antodātta [= tapará], then it would  be a Tatpuruṣa. Patañjali would not have been able to offer a double  interpretation of the expression tapara, had the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī  known to him been fully accented. So in this instance, the absence  of accentuation in the received text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī seems to have  allowed Patañjali to offer interpretations of Pāṇini’s rule that go beyond  Pāṇini’s own intentions.27 There are other instances of expressions of  uncertainty about the accentuation of particular expressions in the  Aṣṭādhyāyī scattered in the Mahābhāṣya.28 How did Patañjali attempt to  figure out what the accentual markings may have been in Pāṇini’s rules?  SCHARFE (2009: 42) remarks: “Patañjali had no knowledge where  the pitch accents and nasalized tags were placed in the Aṣṭādhyāyī.  He had to reconstruct their existence and position from his knowledge  

26 For Patañjali’s discussion of the examples indraśatru and sthūlapṛṣatī, see  Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 24-27 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). Here Patañjali insists that the  knowledge of accents is critical in making a proper decision about the meaning of  the word. With respect to the example sthūlapṛṣatī, Patañjali says: asandehārthaṃ  cādhyeyaṃ vyākaraṇam / yājñikāḥ paṭhanti – sthūlapṛṣatīm āgnivāruṇīm anaḍvāhīm  ālabheteti / tasyāṃ sandehaḥ – sthūlā cāsau pṛṣatī ca sthūlapṛṣatī, sthūlāni pṛṣanti  yasyāḥ seyaṃ sthūlapṛṣatīti  / tāṃ nāvaiyākaraṇaḥ svarato ’dhyavasyati  – yadi  pūrvapadaprakṛtisvaratvaṃ tato bahuvrīhiḥ, atha samāsāntodāttatvaṃ tatas tatpuruṣa  iti /. For an explanation of the example indraśatru, see Pradīpa on Mahābhāṣya, Vol.  I: 28-29 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). 

27 Kaiyaṭa evidently realizes the difficulty in this dual interpretation of tapara  offered by Patañjali, and so he avoids saying that Patañjali is interpreting the same  expression in two ways. He says that the double meaning is obtained either by repetition  of the rule (tantra), where each repeated instance is interpreted differently, or by  assuming that the expression tapara in the rule is an Ekaśeṣa compound of tápara and  tapará [cf. Pradīpa and Uddyota on Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 101 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.).  My Sanskrit teacher in Pune, the late Pandit N.N. Bhide, used to fervently believe that  it was the same Patañjali who was the author of the Yogasūtras and the Mahābhāṣya,  and that Patañjali had special yogic insight into the original understanding of Pāṇini’s  rules. But when confronted with the example of Patañjali’s double interpretation of  taparas tatkālasya, he started having doubts about Patañjali’s yogic abilities. 

28 On P.7.2.44 (svaratisūtisūyatidhūñūdito vā), Patañjali says: kim punar iyam  prāpte vibhāṣā āhosvid aprāpte?... yadi svaratir udāttaḥ tataḥ prāpte, athānudāttas  tato ’prāpte, (Mahābhāṣya, vol 3: 137, Motilal Banarsidass, 1967).

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 71 

of the desired forms and from a study of internal consistencies”. In  several cases, using his knowledge of the desired outcomes, Patañjali  proposes accentuations of particular expressions using the future tense  svarayiṣyate “it shall be read with a Svarita”. Such instances indicate  that Patañjali is proposing to create a version of the Aṣṭādhyāyī that is  different from the received text, and yet, in his opinion, best suits the  needs of the proper derivation.29 

## 6. Specific Svarita issues
6. Specific issues with marking segments of rules with Svarita 

An important case of uncertainty regarding Pāṇini’s formulations  of his rules is his use of the Svarita accent to mark a segment of a  rule to indicate that it continues into subsequent rules. P.1.2.11  (svaritenādhikāraḥ) says that an adhikāra “continuing expression” is  marked with a Svarita accent. This is clearly a metalinguistic use of  accent as a marker.30 An expression is marked with Svarita so that it  need not be repeatedly mentioned in the subsequent rules (Vārttika 1:  adhikāraḥ pratiyogaṃ tasyānirdeśārthaḥ). There are obviously several  questions regarding this procedure. How is this Svarita marked? Does  this Svarita marker override the natural accentuation of words in the  rules of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, or does it stand out on the background of an  otherwise monotone recitation? This has not been clarified anywhere in  the Aṣṭādhyāyī. Secondly, Kātyāyana raises another question, namely  limit of the continuity of an expression marked with Svarita. Kātyāyana  says that we have no way of knowing how far such an expression marked  with Svarita is to be continued (Vārtika 4: adhikāraparimāṇājñānaṃ  tu). To answer this question, Patañjali comes up with an alternative  reading of this rule. The rule should not be (or should not only be?)  read as svaritena adhikāraḥ, but (also?) as svarite na adhikāraḥ “a  segment marked with Svarita shows the limit of an Adhikāra” cf.  Mahābhāṣya, Vol. II: 146 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). Note, however, that  this interpretation is proposed with evaṃ vakṣyāmi “I will say this”.  

29 For a discussion of some instances of svarayiṣyate in the Mahābhāṣya, see  SCHARFE (2009: 42). SCHARFE (p. 43) says: “Patañjali received the Aṣṭādhyāyī  in a written form, where pitch accents and nasalizations were not marked – as in so  many Vedic texts”. I am not entirely convinced that Patañjali received the text of  Pāṇini in a written form. What we can say is that even if we assume that there was  written transmission of Pāṇini’s text, such a written text would have been inadequate  to reflect many features of the oral complexity of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. 

30 For the details of this rule and its operation, see CARDONA (1968). Also  BRONKHORST (2009: 270ff).

72 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

This probably means that this is a novel reading of the rule. It also  indicates the state of the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī as received by Patañjali,  namely a text without breaks between words or even rules. I shall deal  with this aspect later. However, it is quite clear that Patañjali did not  quite know how exactly the Svarita was marked in Pāṇini’s text and how  it was to be interpreted. He proposes to read Svarita markings where  he thinks it can have some benefit, and yet the use of the future tense  indicates that these are novel readings and not merely explanations of  received textual features.31 Finally, unable to justify a viable purpose  for the use of Svarita to mark a continuing expression, Patañjali says  that this rule is needed, because the word adhikāra can be understood  to mean “some extra dispensation” (adhikaḥ kāraḥ), and he provides  some instances of exceptions to normal procedures that he believes can  be accounted for by reading a segment with Svarita. All these proposals  are given in future tense, and indicate that they are proposals to extend  the grammatical procedures, and not explanations of received Pāṇinian  texts or traditions.32 

To cite a case of hypothetical interpretation of an adhikāra marked  with Svarita, let us consider P.2.1.1 (samarthaḥ padavidhiḥ) “A  grammatical operation relating to nominal and verbal forms [ending  with case endings or finite verb endings (padas)] applies under  the conditions of semantic-syntactic relations”. Patañjali opens his  discussion of this rule with the question: “Is this an adhikāra, or is this  a paribhāṣā? If it is treated as an adhikāra, the words of this rule do  not have to be repeated in subsequent rules, but if this is an interpretive  maxim, it will apply wherever conditions for its application occur”.33 Patañjali then asks about what one would need to do to make sure that  this is an adhikāra. His answer is: adhikāre sati svarayitavyam “if this  is (to be) an adhikāra, then a Svarita marking would have to be added”.  Kaiyaṭa explains that this is a proposal to read a Svarita on the word  

31 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. II: 147 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): gostriyor upasarjanasya ity  atra... strīgrahaṇaṃ svarayiṣyate /. Also see: BRONKHORST (2009: 273). 32 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. II: 148 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): adhikaḥ kāraḥ  –  pūrvavipratiṣedhāś ca na paṭhitavyā bhavanti – “guṇavṛddhyautvatṛjvadbhāvebhyo  num pūrvaviprati-ṣiddham,” “numaciratṛjvadbhāvebhyo nuṭ” iti  / num-nuṭau  svarayiṣyete / tatra svaritenādhikaḥ kāro bhavatīti numnuṭau bhaviṣyataḥ /. Also see  SCHARFE (2009: 42). 

33 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. II: 313-314 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): kim punar ayam  adhikāraḥ āhosvit paribhāṣā? kaḥ punar adhikāraparibhāṣayor viśeṣaḥ? adhikāraḥ  pratiyogaṃ tasyānirdeśārtha iti yoge yoge upatiṣṭhate / paribhāṣā punar ekadeśasthā  satī kṛtsnaṃ śāstram abhijvalayati pradīpavat /.

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 73 

samartha, a new proposal rather than an explanation of the rule as  received, and that this proposal, if put into effect, would make the word  padavidhiḥ in this rule unnecessary. If samartha is an adhikāra (marked  with Svarita), then it will automatically continue into the subsequent  rules, and there is no need to state padavidhiḥ as the condition for its  application. So we clearly understand several aspects of this situation.  First, it is clear that Patañjali was not in possession of an accented text  of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, either oral or written. But he felt free to make new  proposals to read accent markings into the received text, if they seemed  beneficial, even if such new proposals made other parts of the original  statements useless.34 

This still leaves one question unanswered. While Patañjali proposes  to read a Svarita accent on the word samartha, it is not made clear as to  how exactly this accent feature is supposed to be displayed. This brings  us back to the earlier discussion of whether the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī  was originally given in monotone, with special accent markings provided  as highlights, or whether the text carried all the normal accentuation  of Sanskrit, in addition to the accent markings used for metalinguistic  purposes. If we assume the alternative of a basic text in monotone,  with special accent markings standing out on the background of this  monotone, then it simplifies how a Svarita can be added to an otherwise  monotone expression. Even in this alternative, we are not yet sure as to  which syllable of the word samarthaḥ would carry this Svarita, and this  has not been clarified by any commentator. 

On the other hand, if we assume that the original text of the  Aṣṭādhyāyī carried all the normal accents (traisvarya), with additional  special accent and nasality markings, then the situation becomes far too  complex. S.D. JOSHI (1968:8) explains this situation: “How an adhikāra  is uttered with svarita is not clear from P.1.3.11 svaritenādhikāraḥ. The  original accentuation of the successive vowels of the word samarthaḥ  is anudātta, udātta, svarita, by P.6.2.139 (the udātta of ártha is retained  in samártha) and by P.8.4.66 (the vowel following after udātta takes  svarita). Whether the adhikārasvarita is different from the original  svarita or whether all vowels of the word samartha will take svarita  

34 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. II: 313-314 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): On P. 2.1.1  (samarthaḥ padavidhiḥ): kim punar ayam adhikāraḥ, āhosvit paribhāṣā?... kaḥ  punar atra prayatnaviśeṣaḥ? adhikāre sati svarayitavyam / paribhāṣāyāṃ tu sarvam  apekṣyam /. On this passage of the Mahābhāṣya, Pradīpa says: svaritaguṇa-yuktaṃ  samarthagrahaṇam paṭhitavyam ity arthaḥ  /... padavidhigrahaṇaṃ cātra pakṣe na  kartavyam ity arthād uktam bhavati /

74 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

is nowhere clear in Mbh”. While I agree with the statement of the  dilemma as presented by JOSHI, I am not certain we are in a position  to talk about “the original accentuation” of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. What  JOSHI has demonstrated is how an expression in the Aṣṭādhyāyī would  be accented, if all normal accent rules of Pāṇini were applied to it.  However, this does not allow us to call such reconstructions “original”  by any means. Elsewhere, S.D. JOSHI and J.A.F. ROODBERGEN  state their assumption that the Aṣṭādhyāyī was “an accented text. We  hope to deal with this question in a separate publication”.35 

Assuming that the Aṣṭādhyāyī and its ancillary texts like the  Dhātupāṭha were accented texts, we can get some further insight  into whether such accentuation could have been normal Sanskrit  accentuation, as described by the accent rules of Pāṇini himself, or it  may have deviated from the normal rules of accent, as the grammar of  Pāṇini’s metalanguage deviates from the grammar of normal Sanskrit  in numerous instances. I will discuss here only one instance to illustrate  this issue. P.1.3.12 (anudāttaṅita ātmanepadam) says that those verb  roots listed in the Dhātupāṭha that are marked either with an Anudātta  vowel or with a marker ṅ take the Ātmanepada endings. P.1.3.72  (svaritañitaḥ kartrabhiprāye kriyāphale) says that the verb roots that are  marked either with a Svarita or with a marker ñ take the Ātmanepada  endings if the fruit of the action denoted by the verb is intended for  the agent of that action. Additionally, as a rule of normal accentuation,  P.8.4.66 (udāttād anudāttasya svaritaḥ) says that an Anudātta syllable  occurring after an Udātta syllable becomes Svarita. To illustrate this  last rule, consider the first two words of the Ṛgveda: agnim īḷe. The  accentuation of these words as given in the Padapāṭha is agním and īḷe.  Both the vowels of īḷe are originally Anudātta. Now, when we look at  the Saṃhitā of the Ṛgveda, we see the application of P.8.4.66. The first  vowel (ī) of īḷe, coming immediately after the Udātta syllable of agním is  changed into a Svarita, and the accented Saṃhitā reads: agnímḷe. With  this Vedic pattern of accentuation, fully justified by Pāṇini’s accent  rules, let us consider an example of a root listed in the Dhātupāṭha.  

35 S.D. JOSHI and J.A.F. ROODBERGEN, The Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, Vol.  I, Introduction: 6. As for marking an adhikāra with a Svarita accent, S.D. JOSHI  and Saroja BHATE (1984: 3) conclude: “Kātyāyana and Patañjali are often in the  dark about which vowels in the grammar are provided with svarita accent indicating  the status of adhikāras in the system. Svarita is decided by means of interpretation  (vyākhyāna) and not by means of the accented text”. Also see JOSHI and BHATE  (1984: 3, fn. 12) for further details.

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 75 

The very second verb root listed in the Dhātupāṭha is edh (edhate). The  Dhātupāṭha explicitly tells us that this root has an Udātta vowel (é) and  an Anudātta marker vowel (ã). By P.1.3.2 (upadeśe ’j anunāsika it), for  a vowel to be a marker (it) sound, it must be nasal. So, at the starting  point, the accentuation of the root must be édhã. If this representation of  the root is then further subjected to the normal accent rules of Sanskrit,  such as P.8.4.66, then the final Anudātta ã of édhã must change to a  Svarita, as it follows an Udātta syllable, and then we will have the root  represented as édhãsv. So now the question is what is the most likely  Pāṇinian representation of this root?  

1) édhã without further applying P.8.4.66 

OR 

2) édhãsv after applying P.8.4.66 

The alternative (1) clearly makes this root subject to P.1.3.12, as  the Ātmanepada for this verb is desired, but then what about applying  P.8.4.66? Pāṇini’s grammar gives us conflicting signals about applying  the normal rules of Sanskrit to the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. For instance,  consider the received reading of P.1.3.2 (upadeśe ’j anunāsika it). In  this rule, we have a reference to the Pratyāhāra ac, which is a shortform  for the list of vowels in the first four Śivasūtras: a i u ṇ, ṛ ḷ k, e o ṅ,  and ai au c. The rule uses the nominative singular of this expression  as ac, before being subjected to a sandhi-rule changing it to aj. Now,  the normal rules of derivation such as P.8.2.30 (coḥ kuḥ) would change  the final c to k, giving us the nominative form as ak. Compare the  nominative form vāk for the nominal stem vāc. However, if the original  shortform ac were to change to ak in this fashion, it would be indistinct  from the shortform ak which includes vowels only from the first two  Śivasūtras: a i u ṇ, ṛ ḷ k. For this reason, Pāṇini chooses not to apply  the normal rule P.8.2.30 to this formation, and this is done in order  to preserve clarity of metalinguistic reference. However, the same  segment ac is then subjected to the normal sandhi rule changing it to aj  before the following vowel. Evidently, this change is not deemed to be  confusing to the student of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. There are hundreds of such  cases scattered through the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, where some rules  of normal Sanskrit are withheld from the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, while  others are allowed to go ahead and apply.  

On the face of it, the alternative (2), achieved by applying the normal  accentuation rule P.8.4.66, would make this root subject to P.1.3.72,  and then it would take the Ātmanepada endings only if the fruit of the 

76 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

action is intended for the agent of the action, leaving the possibility that  this root could otherwise take the Parasmaipada endings. Within the  Pāṇinian system, it is possible to argue that even after applying P.8.4.66,  and changing the final vowel to a Svarita, this rule coming in the last  three quarters of the Aṣṭādhyāyī is treated as if it never took effect, for  the rest of the Aṣṭādhyāyī (cf. P.8.2.1: pūrvatrāsiddham). Hence, it is  possible to argue that P.1.3.72 does not recognize the transformation  brought about by P.8.4.66, and that the root, even if read as édhãsv,  will still be treated as if it was édhã with an Anudātta marker ã. I am  discussing this example at length just to show our ultimate inability to be  sure about the exact oral shape of the Aṣṭādhyāyī and its ancillary texts  like the Dhātupāṭha. This makes us aware of some intrinsic dilemmas  about the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī that are beyond the debate regarding  orality and writing. Additionally, the explicit statements found all  through the received Dhātupāṭha giving us accentual details verbally  make us wonder if the text of the Dhātupāṭha had already lost its oral  accent markings before such statements were added to an original oral  Dhātupāṭha, or if from the very beginning, the basic grammatical texts  were read in monotone, with special instructions about accent markings  being given explicitly in verbal statements. 

## 7. Accented Aṣṭādhyāyī
7. Available accented versions of the Aṣṭādhyāyī 

Among the printed versions of the Aṣṭādhyāyī available to us today,  there are a few versions, which show partial or full accentuation for it,  and it would be important to briefly discuss these versions. Among these  versions, those of KATRE (1987) and DAHIYA (1995) are essentially  reconstructions of these scholars. Several reviewers of KATRE (1987)  have pointed out problems in the partial and inconsistent accentuation  given by KATRE. About the accents of the Aṣṭādhyāyī reconstructed  by KATRE, SCHARFE (1989: 657) remarks: “Katre introduces the  normal accents of Sanskrit into the text, but not consistently: vibhāṣā  (1.1.44 etc.) is apparently never accented, nor is ādyantau (1.1.46)....  the haphazard introduction of ordinary accents of the Sanskrit language  serves no purpose”. In my review of KATRE (DESHPANDE 1989), I  have shown that, for example, KATRE (Aṣṭādhyāyī, p. 27) translates  P.1.1.70 (taparas tatkālasya) as: “A (vowel) phoneme followed or  preceded by marker T denotes homogeneous phonemes of its time  duration”. In this translation, KATRE is following the tradition going  back to Patañjali, as I have discussed earlier in this paper. However,From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 77 

rendering the expression tapara as “followed by T” (taḥ paro yasmāt  saḥ) makes it a Bahuvrīhi compound, with the Udātta accent on tá of  taparaḥ. On the other hand, the rendering “preceded by T” (tāt paraḥ)  makes it a Tatpuruṣa, with the Udātta accent on the final syllable:  taparáḥ. Alternative renderings going back to Patañjali were possible,  as we have seen earlier, simply because the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī by  this time had lost its accents. On the other hand, while ostensibly trying  to reconstruct its accents, KATRE still retains the alternative renderings  of the tradition. KATRE’s partial accentuation reads: Ta-paras tát kālasya. While giving accentuation tát-kālasya, indicating that KATRE  thinks that this is a Bahuvrīhi compound, KATRE gives Ta-paras  without any accents. This makes the accents provided by KATRE’s text  of the Aṣṭādhyāyī not entirely trustworthy, and sometimes completely  counter-productive. 

Yajanveer DAHIYA (1995) provides an accented text of the  Aṣṭādhyāyī that is presumably based on his own reconstruction, a  point that is never made clear in the book. In his introduction (pp. 6-7),  DAHIYA gives reasons for the loss of accents: “From the internal  evidence of the AP it seems that Pāṇini had taught the Aṣṭādhyāyī to  his students with a proper sense of accent. Now the question arises  why it disappeared later. Many arguments can be put forward in this  connection. The major argument in this regard, in the opinion of the  researcher here, is the lack of Vedic studies. In Pāṇini’s time Vedic  studies rested on the high pedestal. Accent plays a major role in Vedic  studies. Vedic studies are generally considered difficult due to their  technical nature. From Pāṇini onward people left the Vedic studies  and turned to studies of classical languages where accent has not  much to do, and language is free from variation of tone or pitch and  where there is hardly any involvement of difference of stress; classical  Sanskrit marks no accent. Owing to this reason accent disappeared  from AP”. This is too specious an explanation and does not account  for why the accents of the Aṣṭādhyāyī were already lost before the time  of Kātāyana and Patañjali, who continue to deal with accent rules of  Pāṇini for both Vedic and contemporary Sanskrit. DAHIYA (p. 213)  himself notes: “From the internal evidence of AP it seems that Pāṇini  had taught the Aṣṭādhyāyī to his pupils with a proper sense of accent.  MB gives evidence that AP was in a monotonous accent. Kaiyaṭa by  quoting some other grammarian’s viewpoint explicitly states that AP  was in monotony accent. But Nāgeśa differs here. According to him,  AP was not in monotony accent. He quotes a line in his support from 

78 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

MB, i.e. ādyudāttanipātanaṃ kariṣyate.... It clearly indicates that AP  was in monotony accent, otherwise Patañjali would have used kṛtam  instead of kariṣyate in the quotation mentioned just above. Therefore,  the view of Nāgeśa is not correct. Thus, it is not acceptable to us, and it  seems that AP was originally marked in monotony accent. Moreover,  we have come across a statement in Pratijñāpariśiṣṭa, i.e. tāna  evāṅgopāṅgānām. It means, the books which are known as aṅga and  upāṅga are in monotony accent. The AP also falls under this category.  I, therefore, agree with the recommendations made by Patañjali in this  regard. According to him, Pāṇini taught all his aphorisms, in monotony  accent. There are, however, evidences to show that the AP was at one  time in monotony accent. I have, therefore, marked the accent in the  original text of the AP which is appended at the close of this treatise”.  In this confusing statement, it is not clear why DAHIYA attempts to  reconstruct the accent of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, if he agrees with Patañjali that  the Aṣṭādhyāyī was originally in monotone. What “other evidences”  are there? Further, DAHIYA has not given any explanation of the  principles he uses to reconstruct the accents of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, and  shows no awareness of specific issues like how the Svarita marking  the adhikāra can be shown distinctively. For example, Sūtra 1.1.69  (taparas tatkālasya) as accented by DAHIYA (p. 240) gives taparás  with a Tatpuruṣa accent which would give us “that which follows t” (tāt  paraḥ) as the only interpretation, while it is the Bahuvrīhi interpretation  that fits most occurrences of tapara items in the Aṣṭādhyāyī. While S.D.  JOSHI (1968: 8) correctly says that the derivational accent of the word  samarthaḥ in P.2.1.1 would be samárthàḥ, before one would need to  think how to add a distinctive Svarita to mark an adhikāra, DAHIYA’s  (p. 244) accentuation places the Udātta accent on the last syllable, and  gives no indication of whether he does or does not consider this to be  an adhikāra, and if it is an adhikāra, how it would be marked with a  Svarita. Thus, on the whole, DAHIYA’s reconstruction of accents is  not very accurate or informative. 

The last accented version I would like to discuss briefly is that  published by Pandit Madhav Ganesh JOSHI (1992). Regarding the  accented manuscript of the Aṣṭādhyāyī used by Pandit JOSHI, S.D.  JOSHI says in his preface (p. 1): “Mr. Nipanikar Shastri (= Madhav  Ganesh Joshi) came in possession of the manuscript by pure chance. One  day, some 50 years ago, a person came to Mr. Nipanikar Shastri’s grocery  shop to sell old paper useful for packing articles. Mr. Nipanikar Shastri  bought the lot offered to him. Among the old papers he discovered the 

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 79 

manuscript, to his great surprise. Thus about the original owner and the  place of origin of the manuscript nothing is known”. According to S.D.  JOSHI, this manuscript “is of rather recent date, somewhere between  1870 and 1930”. Pandit JOSHI claims that he checked the accents as  shown in the manuscript with Vedic reciters who recite the Aṣṭādhyāyī  with accents and that these reciters told him that the accents of the  manuscript seem to match their recitation. After checking the accents  in Pandit Joshi’s edition, S.D. JOSHI remarks (preface: 4): “What is  the conclusion to be drawn from these observations?... The conclusion  I draw from what I have noted is that the manuscript which is obviously  meant as a help for pandits during recitation does not strictly follow  the Pāṇinian rules for accentuation, both as regards word – or sentence  accent, and as regards technical accent. But from what I heard from Mr.  Nipanikar Shastri I understand that Vaidika Daśagranthī pandits like  Vedamūrti Ghaisas Shastri from Poona have assured Mr. Nipanikar  Shastri that the accentuation given by the manuscript is exactly that  which they have learnt for purposes of recitation”. 

I have checked a few sample rules from Pandit JOSHI’s edition. For  P.1.1.70, like the version of DAHIYA, Pandit JOSHI’s accentuation  gives the Udātta accent on the final vowel of taparáḥ, which would  make this into a Tatpuruṣa compound with an interpretation that is not  historically accurate. It is the Bahuvrīhi interpretation of this word that  is applicable to most cases of tapara items in the Aṣṭādhyāyī. Also for  P.2.1.1 (samarthaḥ padavidhiḥ), Pandit JOSHI’s manuscript places  the Udātta accent on the last syllable of samartháḥ, with no indication  of a Svarita. This is at variance with the accent reconstructed by  S.D. JOSHI, which places the Udātta accent on the second syllable.  So, on the whole, Pandit JOSHI’s edition is valuable as an authentic  representation of accentuation of the Aṣṭādhyāyī in the recitation of  the Vaidika reciters, but there is very little chance that it represents  historically authentic accentuation.36 Also one should note that neither  KATRE, nor DAHIYA nor Pandit JOSHI indicates the nasal marking  in the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. Especially the lack of the nasal marking in  

36 Yudhiṣṭhira MĪMĀṂSAKA (1973: 230) refers to a manuscript of the  Aṣṭādhyāyī where only the first Pāda was given with accents, but MĪMĀṂSAKA  remarks that the accents were all incorrect. He also refers to other manuscripts that  contain incorrect accentuation. He believes that someone tried to add accents to the  Aṣṭādhyāyī following Nāgeśa’s view that the original Aṣṭādhyāyī was fully accented.  However, it is likely that as pointed out by Pandit JOSHI, such accented manuscripts  were used by Vedic reciters.

80 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

Pandit JOSHI’s edition is significant. That means that while the Vaidika  reciters maintained some sort of accent for the Aṣṭādhyāyī, its nasality  for the marker vowels was lost beyond recovery. This is the area we  shall now turn to. 

## 8. Unmarked nasality
8. Nasality not clearly marked in the received text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī 

P. 1.3.2 (upadeśe ’j anunāsika it) says that a vowel, uttered with  nasality in the grammatical items enunciated by Pāṇini, is treated  as a marker (it). Such markers, both vocalic and consonantal, are  unconditionally deleted (cf. P.1.3.9: tasya lopaḥ), and are not part of  the phonetic shape of the grammatical item. However, Pāṇini refers  to these markers when prescribing various operations in his grammar,  and thus our ability to identify the existence of these markers is critical  in deciding which operations can apply to a given grammatical item.  I have already referred to the famous statement of the Kāśikāvṛtti on  this rule that states that the Pāṇinian scholars recognize nasality of  such marker vowels only by the authoritative assertion of convention  (pratijñānunāsikyāḥ pāṇinīyāḥ). Bhaṭṭojī in his Prauḍhamanoramā says:  “Though the recitation of the rules with nasality made by Pāṇini is now  lost, we infer that such a recitation once existed, on the basis of the usage  of the author of the Kāśikāvṛtti”.37 Explaining the same rule, i.e. P.1.3.2,  Bhaṭṭoji’s Śabdakaustubha provides an even more detailed account of  this phenomenon: “The upadeśa or teaching of Pāṇini includes the  Sūtras, the Vārttikas, the lists of nominal stems (in the Gaṇapāṭha) and  the Dhātupāṭha. In all these texts, the recitation of the nasal vowels  done by the author of the Sūtras is now corrupted. For this reason, the  author of the Kāśikāvṛtti says – pratijñānunāsikyāḥ pāṇinīyāḥ. Among  the examples, we include the roots édhã and spárdhã, where due to  the nasally marked Anudātta vowels, we get the Ātmanepada endings  [by P.1.3.12: anudāttaṅita ātmanepadam], e.g. edhate and spardhate. In  deriving the [nominative singular] form bhavān from the root bhū [with  the addition of the affix śátṛns by P.3.2.124], we can get the augment  n(um) [for the át of śátṛns leading to bhavant > bhavān], because [the  affix śátṛns is marked with a nasal marker ṛns included in the shortform]  uk [allowing the application of P.7.1.70: ugidacāṃ sarvanāmasthāne  ’dhātoḥ].38 Since the a in the Śivasūtra (lãṇ) is [declared to be] nasal,  

37 yady api sūtrakārakṛto ’nunāsikapāṭha idānīm paribhraṣṭas tathāpi  vṛttikārādivyava-hārabalena yathākāryam prāk sthita ity anumīyate  /,  Prauḍhamanoramā: 44-45). 

38 For the derivation of bhavān, see S.M. KATRE (1987: 866).

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 81 

we can derive the shortform (pratyāhāra) rã [which includes the  sounds r from the Śivasūtra h(a)y(a)v(a)r(a)ṭ and l from the Śivasūtra  lãṇ]. [Similarly] we can derive the Ātmanepada forms like avagalbhate because [the roots] like avagalbha [listed] in Kātyāyana’s Vārttika  [3, ācāre ’vagalbhaklībahoḍebhyaḥ kvib vā, on P.3.1.11 (kartuḥ kyaṅ  salopaś ca)] have a nasal Anudātta marker [in the reading avagalbhã39,  allowing the Ātmanepada by P.1.3.12: anudāttaṅita ātmanepadam].”40 In this interesting listing, some instances like the nasal marking with  ṛns in the affix śátṛns and the nasal markings on the roots édhã and  spárdhã go back all the way to Pāṇini. The nasal marking on roots like  avagalbhã in Kātyāyana’s Vārttika goes back to a novel proposal by  Patañjali, and in all likelihood not part of Kātyāyana’s intention. The  idea to read the vowel a in the Śivasūtra laṇ with nasality is not seen in  the Mahābhāṣya, but is promoted by Bhartṛhari,41 the Kāśikāvṛtti (on the  Śivasūtra laṇ), Kaiyaṭa42 and the Siddhāntakaumudī, and is disputed all  the way down to Nāgeśabhaṭṭa.43 This shows that there is no assurance  

39 The reading of a nasal marker for avagalbha etc. in this Vārttika is explicitly  proposed by Patañjali: ātmanepadārthān anubandhān āsaṅkṣyāmīti  / galbha klība  hoḍa /, and Kaiyaṭa: vākye ’kārasyānudāttatvānunāsikatve pratijñāyete iti bhāvaḥ /,  Mahābhāṣya, Vol. III: 42 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). Note the use of the future form  āsaṅkṣyāmi in the Mahābhāṣya passage, indicating that this is a novel proposal, rather  than an explanation of things as they are. 

40 Śabdakaustubha (Vol II-Fas. 5-10: 55 (ed. by Gopal SHastri NENE),  Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series): sa ca (upadeśaḥ) dhātupāṭhaprātipadikapāṭhau  sūtravārttike ca  / tatra śāstrakṛtā paṭhitasyāpy anunāsikasya pāṭha idānīm  apabhraṣṭaḥ  / ata evāhur vṛttikārāḥ  – “pratijñānunāsikyāḥ pāṇinīyāḥ” iti  / tatra  edha, spardha ity ādāv anudāttettvād ātmanepadam / edhate, spardhate / “bhavati”  ity atrogittvān num  / bhavān  / “laṇ” sūtre akārasyettvād rapratyāhārasiddhiḥ  /  “ācāre ’vagalbhaklībahoḍhebhyaḥ” (Kā. Vā.) iti vārttike ’vagalbhāder  anunāsikatvenānudāttettvāt taṅ / avagalbhate ity ādi / 

41 Mahābhāṣyadīpika: 43: tatrānubandhā hala eva / ayaṃ tv ekaḥ ajanubandhaḥ /  laṇ iti lakāre akāraḥ / uraṇ rapara ity atra ca ṛkāralkārayo ralaparatvārthaḥ /. 42 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 226 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): ḷkārasya laparatvaṃ  vakṣyāmi /; Pradīpa: laparatvam iti vyākhyāsyāmīty arthaḥ / rapara ity atra ra iti laṇ  iti rakārākāreṇa pratyāhāra āśrīyate /. 

43 Uddyota on Pradīpa on Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 226 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): anye  tu laṇsūtrasthākārasyānunāsikatve ’to lrāntasyetry atra bhagavān pāṇinir lakāraṃ  noccārayet pratyāhāreṇaiva nirvāhāt  / tasmād apūrvaṃ vacanaṃ kāryam ity eva  bhāṣyāśaya ucita ity āhuḥ  /. Śivadatta KUDĀLA, the editor of the Nirnayasagara  edition of the Mahābhāṣya appends an extensive note to reject Kaiyaṭa’s suggestion.  We may also note that there are several manuscripts listed in various catalogues with  the title Rapratyāhārakhaṇḍana.

82 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

that the commentarial suggestions for reading a nasal vocalic marker go  back to Pāṇini himself, and this shows that the received text of Pāṇini,  written and/or oral, did not carry such assured nasal markings. 

Another proposal for nasalization is seen in the Mahābhāṣya on  P.7.1.25 (aḍ ḍatarādibhyaḥ pañcabhyaḥ).44 Here the rule proposes the  addition of -ad to forms like katara in neuter giving us the form katarad for the nominative and accusative. Kātyāyana worries that, especially  in the neuter nominative derivation katara+su, when su is replaced with  ad, we would have katara+ad leading to katarād as the form, instead  of the desired katarad. To avoid this problem, Kātyāyana wants to get  rid of the a of ad by marking it as a nasal ã. This would make it an it 

sound and be subsequently deleted. Such a proposal essentially raises  the question as to why Pāṇini should have stated the replacement as ad to begin with, and gives us little assurance that this nasal vowel was a  feature of Pāṇini’s own formulation. 

## 9. Nasal marking for some consonants
9. Nasal marking for some consonants in the Aṣṭādhyāyī? 

The uncertainty about the exact phonetic form of the transmitted  text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī allowed the commentators to conveniently read  various features into the text in order to resolve certain perceived  problems. In a few cases, we notice that the commentators propose to  read the consonants y and v with nasality. There is no special rule in  Pāṇini’s grammar attributing a specific function to such nasal ỹ and .  However, by distinguishing y from ỹ, and v from , the commentators  intend to fine tune Pāṇini’s rules to avoid certain perceived problems. 

P.7.1.1 (yuvor anākau) says that the items yu and vu, occurring  as part of the Pratyayas “affixes”, are replaced by ana and aka,  respectively. Such replacements are seen in formations like karaṇa and  kāraka [kṛ+lyu > kṛ+ana > k=kar+ana; kṛ+ṇvul > kṛ+aka > kār+aka].  Nothing in the context of P.7.1.1 directly restricts yu and vu to certain  affixes, or excludes other affixes or even verb roots. We do not want the  affixes in forms like bhuj-yu, kam-yu, and śam-yu to be replaced with  ana. Similarly, we do not want the verb root yu in forms like yu-tvā or  yu-taḥ to be replaced with ana. How can we limit the scope of yu and vu  

44 Mahābhāṣya on P.7.1.25 (aḍ ḍatarādibhyaḥ pañcabhyaḥ), Vol. III: 28,  Motilal Banarsidass edn: Varttika 1: adbhāve pūrvasavarṇapratiṣedhaḥ /... Vārttika  2: siddham anunāsikopadhatvāt /; Bhāṣya: siddham etat / katham? anunāsikopadho  ’cśabdaḥ kariṣyate /. Note the use of the future form kariṣyate to make this novel  proposal. This indicates that this is not a received textual feature of Pāṇini, but a new  feature proposed by Kātyāyana.

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 83 

referred to in this rule to only those instances where such replacements  with ana and aka are desirable? Realizing this difficulty, Kātyāyana  comes up with a series of proposals.  

Vārttika 3 on P.7.1.1 (anunāsikaparatvāt siddham) proposes that u in yu and vu in this rule be read as a nasal ũ. Thus the rule would only  propose the replacements of yũ and vũ in the affixes to ana and aka respectively, and not for instances of yu and vu with a non-nasal u. This  procedure would obviously require that the u of those affixes like lyuṭ and ṇvul, where this rule of replacement needs to apply, would have to  be read as a nasal ũ. This may resolve some problems, but may create  other problems, as this nasal ũ would be treated as a marker (it) sound,  and all the other operations that apply to items marked with ũ would  undesirably apply to formations derived with affixes like lyuṭ and  ṇvul. To avoid these problems, Kātyāyana then proposes the following  alternative. 

Vārttika 22 on P.7.1.1 (siddhaṃ tu yuvor anunāsikatvāt), as  understood by Patañjali, proposes that the y and v of yu and vu be  marked as nasal ỹ and , and not make the u of yu and vu a nasal ũ.  This would then require that y and v in affixes like lyuṭ and ṇvul be  read nasal as well. Nāgeśa’s Uddyota says that Patañjali has accepted  this suggestion of Kātyāyana, while Kaiyaṭa believes that this is not a  Vārttika of Kātyāyana, but a statement of Patañjali himself.45 Nāgeśa’s  comments in this discussion again make it clear that this is a novel  suggestion, and not an explanation of a received feature, and that this  suggestion will require that y and v in affixes like lyuṭ and ṇvul be read  nasal, and the y and v in other places be read non-nasal.46 

Another instance of a proposed nasalization of v is seen in the  discussions on P.6.1.67 (ver apṛktasya). This rule says that the v of an  affix vi, remaining as a single-sound (after the deletion of i), is also  deleted. In an affix such as kvip, the marker sounds k and p are first  deleted. Of the remaining vi, the sound i is deleted as it is supposed to  be nasalized, and hence treated as a marker. The present rule deletes  the remaining sound v, and hence effectively there is no phonological  

45 Nāgeśa’s Uddyota: tasmād anunāsikayaṇviśiṣṭayor yuvor imāv ādeśāv  iti bhāṣyatātparyam; Kaiyaṭa’s Pradīpa: bhāṣyakārīyam idaṃ vākyam ity āhuḥ,  Vyākaraṇamahābhāṣya, Vol. 3: 10, Motilal Banarsidass edn. 

46 tasmād anunāsikayaṇviśiṣṭayor yuvor imāv ādeśāv iti bhāṣyatātparyam  /...  yatra lyuḍādāv anākāv iṣyete te ’nunāsikayaṇaḥ paṭhanīyāḥ / bhujyur ity ādayaś ca  niranunāsikā iti doṣābhāvaḥ /, Uddyota, Vyākaraṇamahābhāṣya, Vol. 3: 10, Motilal  Banarsidass edn.

84 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

trace remaining of the original kvip. Kātyāyana’s Vārttikas on this  rule debate whether one can find alternative formulations for this rule,  without the expression apṛktasya. Without the expression apṛktasya in  this rule, the rule would simply propose to delete the entire segment vi.  If that happens, then such a deletion would extend to formations like  darvi and jāgṛvi, where such a deletion is undesirable, and one would  need to state explicitly a prohibition of the deletion of vi in such forms.  

Kātyāyana’s Vārttika 1 on P.6.1.67 (ver lope darvijāgṛvyor  apratiṣedho ’nunāsikaparatvāt) suggests that this can be avoided by  assuming that the i of vi in this rule is nasalized (as in fact the tradition  already recognizes), and this will allow us to distinguish vĩ from vi, and  then expect the deletion to apply only to vĩ, and not to vi.  

The second solution proposed by Kātyāyana is to read the v of vi with  nasality as  i. Again the purpose of this suggestion is to distinguish  i  that is subject to deletion, from vi that is not subject to deletion, as in the  forms darvi and jāgṛvi.47 Both of these proposals are novel proposals,  and not explanations of the received text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, and they  would require changes of readings wherever the -vi- affixes, subject to  deletion, occur. This discussion again points to a lack of an assured text  prompting commentators to make proposals for nasalization of vowels  and consonants in order to seek refinements in the Pāṇinian system.48 

## 10. Text of Pāṇini known to Patañjali
10. Text of Pāṇini known to Patañjali: Saṃhitāpāṭha or Separated  Sūtras? 

Patañjali’s discussion on P.1.1.1 (vṛddhir ādaic) gives us some  important insights regarding the nature of the text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī that  he had received. This discussion indicates two contradictory aspects of  the expression ādaic.49 The first question is the exceptional behavior  

47 Vārttika 3 on P.6.1.67 (vasya vā ’nunāsikatvāt siddham); Bhāṣya: athavā  vakārasyaivedam anunāsikasya grahaṇam /; Uddyota: kvibhādiṣu cānunāsiko vakāraḥ  pratijñātaḥ /, Mahābhāṣya, Vol V: 66-67 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.). 

48 The Bṛhatparibhāṣāvṛtti of Sīradeva has an extensive discussion of the nasality  of u in the item ru in P.8.2.66, and interestingly he also cites an argument that proposes  to read the r of ru as nasal (evaṃ tarhi rephasyaivānunāsikatvam pratijñāyatāṃ  svaritatva-pratijñānavat), though it is later rejected, cf. Paribhāṣāsaṃgraha: 183. In  this argument as well, note the use of the form pratijñāyatām, making it clear that this  is a proposal for a novel reading of the rule P.8.2.66. 

49 Mahābhāṣya (on P.1.1.1), Vol. I: 135-138 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): kutvaṃ  kasmāt na bhavati “coḥ kuḥ”, “padasya” iti? bhatvāt  / kathaṃ bhasaṃjñā?  “ayasmayādīni cchandasi” iti  / chandasīty ucyate, na cedaṃ chandaḥ  / chandovat 

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 85 

of this formation. Normally, for a nominal stem like vāc, ending in a  palatal stop, the palatal changes to a velar in some case-forms, and we  get the nominative singular with a velar: vāk. If this is the norm, then  why does the c of aic in this rule not change to k? Patañjali’s answer  to this question is that this is an exceptional behavior, because such  exceptions do occur in the Veda, and the rules of Pāṇini are like the  Veda. The practical reason why Pāṇini chose not to apply the normal  rules of Sanskrit to aic is that if it is changed to aik, it will not be  recognized as the shortform that is supposed to refer to the sounds  in the Śivasūtras beginning with ai and listed up to the marker c [cf.  Śivasūtra ai-au-c].  

But the next dilemma discussed by Patañjali shows another aspect  of the received text. If the expression aic is treated exceptionally (as  a bha item, and not as a pada item), then how can we account for  the sandhi transformation seen in the Saṃhitā reading of the rules:  vṛddhirādaijadeṅguṇaḥ (P.1.1.1-2)? Patañjali says that for this change  of c to j, the expression aic is treated like a pada, and therefore it is  subject to normal rules of sandhi. So the same expression is a bha item,  and not a pada, in preventing the change of c to k, but then it is treated  like a pada in effecting the change of c to j. What is clear from this  discussion is that Patañjali’s received text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī showed  the shortform aic not being subject to the velar replacement rule, but  being subjected to normal rules of sandhi, in an environment of external  sandhi. This would indicate that Pāṇini’s rules, or at least a version  of those rules, were transmitted in the Saṃhitā form, without a break  between the rules in their recitation.  

We see the same phenomenon within a single rule as well. For example,  P.1.3.2 (upadeśe ’j anunāsika it) shows the same two contradictory  aspects of a single expression, though here this occurs within the same  rule, and not in the context of sandhi across the boundary of two rules.  Here, the shortform ac is not subjected to the velar replacement rule,  but it is subjected to the rules of external sandhi within the same rule.  The expression ac does not change to ak, because it is treated as a  bha, and not as a pada, but the same item is treated as a pada and this  allows the change of ac to aj in the environment of sandhi. As far as  the sandhi environment is concerned, there is no difference between the  sequences vṛddhirādaijadeṅguṇaḥ and upadeśejanunāsika-it. These  

sūtrāṇi bhavanti  / yadi bhasaṃjñā, “vṛddhirādaijadeṅguṇaḥ” iti jaśtvam api na  prāpnoti / ubhayasaṃjñāny api chandāṃsi dṛśyante /... evam ihāpi padatvāt jaśtvaṃ,  bhatvāt kutvaṃ na bhaviṣyati /. 

86 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

are continuous recitational sequences without gaps between words,  or rules for that matter.50 Also note that svaritenādhikāraḥ and svarite  nādhikāraḥ are to alternative interpretations of the same received oral/ written sequence, indicating that there were no gaps between the words  in the received sequence, and breaking down the received sequences  into words is itself an act of interpretation. 

11. Yogavibhāga and uncertainty of Sūtra divisions and numbering 

The text of Pāṇini was transmitted to Patañjali in the Saṃhitā form,  though he knew where the breaks in this Saṃhitā were. However, these  breaks were negotiable, as seen in the discussions of Yogavibhāga. This  term refers to proposals to split what was traditionally received and  understood as a single rule into two segments and read these segments  as two separate rules. This discussion reflects a confluence of two  interrelated concerns, namely the lack of complete certainty about where  the breaks between the rules were in the traditionally received text of  the Aṣṭādhyāyī, and an effort to seemingly improve the interpretation of  the rules to fit the language as known to the grammarians, occasionally  resorting to dividing a traditionally received single rule into two  segments. 

Let us consider an example of this phenomenon. On P.1.1.17  (uña ūns), Kātyāyana proposes to read this as two rules, i.e. uñaḥ and  ūns.51 Such a suggestion causes variation with the different numbering  of rules of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. The differences in the numbering affect  mnemonic tools designed within the tradition. For example, at the end  of each Pāda of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, there is a mnemonic string attached  for the use of the reciters that allows them to infer the exact numerical  place of each Sūtra. The string at the end of the first Pāda of the 1st  Adhyāya reads: vṛddhir-ādyantavad-avyayibhāvaḥ-pratyayasyaluk pañcadaśa.52 This string lists the beginnings of Sūtras 1, 21, 41, 61, and  the number of remaining Sūtras in this Pāda. Thus the list divides each  Pāda into groups of twenty Sūtras, and then counts the remaining odd  

50 Also see: Yudhiṣṭhira MĪMĀṂSAKA (1973: 228) for other passages in the  Mahābhāṣya indicating that Patañjali knew the Aṣṭādhyāyī in a Saṃhitāpāṭha. Similar  problems appear in different ways of splitting Bhagavadgītā (2.16ab: nāsato vidyate  bhāvaḥ, nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ, or nāsato vidyate ’bhāvaḥ nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ)  leading to different interpretations by Śaṅkara and Madhva. 

51 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 253 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): Vārttika 2: uña iti  yogavibhāgaḥ. 

52 Cf. Siddhāntakaumudī: 755, appendix of the Aṣṭādhyāyī-sūtra-pāṭha.From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 87 

balance. To find out the numerical location of a given Sūtra, the reciter  of the Aṣṭādhyāyī starts reciting with that Sūtra going forward, until  he hits a marker in one of these mnemonic strings, and he can quickly  calculate the number. This mnemonic system is designed by the Vaidika  reciters, who have similar mnemonic devices for Vedic texts. However,  practices like Yoga-vibhāga “splitting a single rule into multiple rules”  cause problems with the numbering of the Sūtras, and this is reflected  in the production of alternative mnemonic strings produced for the  Aṣṭādhyāyī by different schools of reciters. Such differences are also  reflected in different manuscripts of the Aṣṭādhyāyī.  

Referring to P.1.1.17 (uña ūns) and its proposed division into two  rules by Kātyāyana, Pandit Śivadatta KUDDĀLA, the editor of the  Nirṇayasāgara edition of the Mahābhāṣya, comments:53 

Pāṇini uttered just a single Sūtra uña ūns. Therefore, it is appropriate  that Haradatta says in his Padamañjarī – ‘if this is a single rule – uña ūns  – as recited by the author of the Sūtra’. Therefore, it is  appropriate to attach a single number to this entire segment – uña ūns,  and it is not appropriate to accept the separate numbering assumed  by the later tradition and seen in the editions of the Kāśikāvṛtti, the  Siddhāntakaumudī, and the Mahābhāṣya. One should not argue that  the separate numbering is justified, because Patañjali approved this  splitting of the rule. If such were the case, we would have to have  separate numbering in cases like saha supā and śliṣa āliṅgane, where  

53 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 253, fn. 3 (Nirṇayasāgara edn): “uña ūns” ity etāvad  ekam eva sūtraṃ pāṇininā proktam ata eva prakṛtasūtrapadamañjaryāṃ - ‘yady ayam  eko yogaḥ syāt uña ūns iti yathāpaṭhitaṃ sūtrakāreṇa’ iti haradattoktaṃ saṃgacchate /  tathā ca samudita uña ūns ity atraiva saṃkhyāṅka eka evocitaḥ, na tvādhunikakalpitaḥ  kāśikāyāṃ kaumudyāṃ bhāṣye copalabhyamānaḥ kramikaḥ pṛthak saṃkhyāṅkaḥ  /  na ca bhāṣyakṛtā yogavibhāgasya darśitatvena saṃkhyāvibhāgo’py ucita eveti  vācyam  / tathā sati saha supā, śliṣa āliṅgane ity ādāv api yogavibhāgasattvena  pṛthaksaṃkhyāṅkasyaucityāpatteḥ / na ca tatra yogavibhāgasya bhāṣyakṛtkṛtatvena na  pṛthaksaṃkhyāṅkadānam / atra tu pāṇinikṛtatvena pṛthaggaṇaneti vācyam / atrāpi bhāṣye  kṛta ity anuktvā yogavibhāgaḥ kartavya iti tavyapratyayaprayogeṇa yogavibhāgasya  pāṇinyakṛtatvasūcanena pṛthaksaṃkhyāṅgīkārānaucityāt / na caivaṃ prathamapāde  pañcasaptatiḥ sūtrāṇi na syur iti vācyam / pañcasaptatigaṇanāyā aprāmāṇikatvāt /  na ca vṛddhir-ādyantavad-avyayībhāvaḥ-pratyayasyaluk-pañcadaśa iti lekhasya  pādasamāptāv aṣṭādhyāyyāṃ pāṇinikṛtasyaiva mānatvenāprāmāṇikatvakalpanāyāṃ  mūloccheda iti vācyam / pratipādasamāpti tādṛśalekhopadarśitasaṃkhyāyā bahutra  vārtikagaṇasūtraprakṣepeṇa pūrtidarśanāt tādṛśalekhe pāṇinikṛtatvābhāvakalpanata  eva doṣoddhārasambhavāt  / prācīnapustake vṛddhistarapśisarvapratyayalope  caturdaśa ity evam eva pāṭhasyopalabhyamānatvāc ceti dik / [dādhimathāḥ]

88 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

Patañjali proposes splitting these rules. One should not argue that, in  these cases, there is no separate numbering given, simply because it is  Patañjali, [and not Pāṇini], who approves their splitting, while in the  case of uña ūns, one should accept separate numbering, because it is  Pāṇini himself who intended this segment to be two Sūtras. Even in  this case, the Bhāṣya does not say that Pāṇini himself taught these as  two separate rules, but he uses the gerundive kartavyaḥ implying that  this separation into two Sūtras is newly being proposed. This suggests  that Pāṇini himself did not give these as two separate rules, and hence  giving two separate numbers for them is inappropriate. One should  not object that counting these two as a single rule would not give us  the count of seventy-five Sūtras in the first Pāda of the Aṣṭādhyāyī,  because this count of seventy-five Sūtras is inauthentic. Also one should  not claim that the mnemonic string vṛddhir-ādyantavadavyayībhāvaḥ  pratyayasya luk pañcadaśa found at the end of the first Pāda goes  back to Pāṇini himself, and therefore the count of seventy-five Sūtras  cannot be claimed to be inauthentic. The numbers given in such  mnemonic strings are often made up by the inclusion of insertions of  statements from the Vārttikas and Gaṇasūtras, and therefore it is best  to avoid problems by regarding such mnemonic strings as not being  authored by Pāṇini himself. And in an older manuscript, we find the  mnemonic string vṛddhis-tarap-śisarva-pratyayalope-caturdaśa,54 [listing only seventy-four rules in this Pāda]. 

This discussion points to the inherent uncertainties reflected in the  nature of the transmitted text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, and the variability  of numbering the Sūtras, in part caused by proposals to split several  segments into two Sūtras. Here we are not even bringing into our  consideration the changes in the Sūtras brought about by the Kāśikā 

vṛtti. SCHARFE (2009) has discussed other instances of proposals for  Yogavibhāga.55 

54 This string reflects the changed numbering of rules in the first Pāda of the  Aṣṭādhyāyī, if uña ūns is counted as a single Sūtra. In this case, taraptamapau ghaḥ is  P.1.1.21, śi sarvanāmasthāne is P.1.1.41, pratyayalope pratyayalakṣaṇam is P.1.1.61,  and the remaining balance is counted as 14 Sūtras. 

55 SCHARFE (2009: 37-39): “There may be legitimate questions, whether the  division of sūtras that Kātyāyana received was in all instances the one intended by  Pāṇini; JOSHI and BHATE considered arguments whether I 2 17 sthā-GHVor ic ca  and II 4 103 yāsuṭ parasmaipadeṣūdātto ṅic ca should each better be considered as two  sūtras instead of one. Our Pāṇini text reads IV 3 116 kṛte granthe and 117 saṃjñāyām  as two sūtra-s. Kātyāyana’s vārttika 3 on IV 3 116 45 suggests that he postulated the 

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 89 

## 12. Possible effect of script
12. Possible effect of the presence of script in the background 

As I have discussed so far, the transmission of the text of the  Aṣṭādhyāyī with features like accentuation and nasality of marker  vowels was lost even prior to Kātyāyana and Patañjali. The question  of whether Pāṇini himself ever used any form of script cannot be  answered definitively, and as we have seen earlier, even if he had tried  to use some form of early Kharoṣṭhī to write down his grammar, most  complicated features of his oral text could not have been represented  in those early forms of scripts, or at least in the forms of scripts as they  are known to us from the inscriptional record. However, given the fact  that in P. 3.2.21 Pāṇini provides for the derivation of the word lipikara “scribe”, and Kātyāyana’s explanation that the form yavanānī derived  by P.4.1.40 refers to the script of the Yavanas,56 allow us to infer that he  was familiar with the phenomenon of writing, and most probably with  the script of the Yavanas, most likely the Greek and the Aramaic scripts.  It is even possible that, like the Vaidika reciters who looked down upon  those who recite from a written text (cf. Sarvasammataśikṣā, verse 36,  cited in ALLEN 1953: 16), Pāṇini may have refused to use a script  to represent his grammatical text as a form of religious resistance. So  we are left with minimal historical evidence that Pāṇini was familiar  with the phenomenon of writing, though he himself may or may not  have used. Given this minimal justifiable historical datum, what can we  say about the possible effect of such a background presence of writing  

division (implying that he knew the two as one sūtra). JOSHI/BHATE have suggested  instead, that originally saṃjñāyām was joined with the following sūtra IV 3 118 to  read saṃjñāyām kulālādibhyo VUñ. 46. In the twenty-six instances of yoga-vibhāga  invoked by Kātyāyana, he applied the sections of a sūtra in stages. The purpose was to  achieve the desired forms without changing the words in Pāṇini’s sūtras. The opposite  is eka-yoga “[leaving it as] one rule” which Kātyāyana used five times during the  defense of his yoga-vibhāga. He had proposed to divide I 4 58/59 (prādaya upasargāḥ  kriyā-yoge in our text) into two rules: first [56 nipātāḥ 57 asattve] prādayaḥ, then  upasargāḥ kriyā-yoge, so that pra etc. could also be termed nipāta “particles” – but  if it is a single rule (eka-yoga), the term nipāta (from sūtra 56) would be set aside  by the new term upasarga (in sūtra 58/59). The later tradition, e.g. the Kāśikā and  the Siddhāntakaumudī, accepted the division into two sūtras which accounts for the  double number given in modern editions of the Aṣṭādhyāyī”. 

56 Professor SCHARFE has drawn my attention to Paul THIEME’s view  (THIEME 1966:50) that for Pāṇini, the word yavanānī most likely referred to a Greek  woman. I thank Prof. SCHARFE for this reference. I tend to believe that the contrast  between the forms yavanī and yavanānī is as old as Pāṇini, and continues to show up  in later literature, and that Kātyāyana may indeed be correct.

90 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

in the culture around Pāṇini upon his linguistic analysis and thinking?  This is obviously a speculative area, and yet it may be interesting to  speculate about this matter. 

Here I am going to refer to some of the research into the literacy  studies by authorities like Jack GOODY and Robert J. SCHOLES. In  his ground-breaking work, The Domestication of the Savage Mind, Jack  GOODY (1977: 44) makes the following observations about oral and  written language: “Because when an utterance is put in writing it can  be inspected in a much greater detail, in its parts as well as in its whole,  backwards as well as forwards, out of context as well as in its setting;  in other words, it can be subjected to a quite different type of scrutiny  and critique than is possible with purely verbal communication. Speech  is no longer tied to an occasion; it becomes timeless”.57 

I do not wish to go into a history of the modern literacy studies,  or their critiques. I simply want to draw attention to the two distinct  facilities represented by writing versus orality. Writing makes the  language available for an inspection that is not bound by the sequential  time of the oral production of speech. The temporal landscape becomes  as if horizontal, where the units of speech like sounds and words sit  on a common flat plane. Here they can all be seen simultaneously, and  analyzed and described. This is not true of an oral stream of speech  stretching along a temporal dimension, where only one sound can  appear at a time. The previous sound or sounds are gone and have  become memory, while the subsequent sounds are yet to be uttered,  and hence can only be guessed. The sense perception gives immediate  access only to one sound at any given moment, the rest being either  memory or guesswork. Such is the distinction between orality and  writing proposed by Jack GOODY. 

Coming to the ancient Indian tradition, the same sort of distinction  can be brought in, without the express assumption of the presence  of writing. What we see in ancient India is an expansive role given  

57 SCHOLES 1993 (87-92) contains a fascinating discussion of paleographic  evidence being used to reconstruct linguistic concepts that may have existed among  the users of various forms of writing. SCHARFE (2009) provides some discussion of  the features of early Kharoṣṭhī and Brāhmī writing and possible effects of such early  writing on the scripted versions of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, had such attempts to write down  the Aṣṭādhyāyī been made either by Pāṇini himself or by his successors. This includes  a discussion of the inability of the early scripts to represent features like vowel length,  accents, nasality, or representing geminates. He has also discussed the appearance of  gaps between the words in the inscriptional record, and what this could mean for the  transmission of the Aṣṭādhyāyī.

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 91 

to memorization of texts, and their active manipulation, in ways that  suggest that trained memory provides a flat plane for linguistic material,  similar to what writing provides. Elsewhere (in DESHPANDE 1990)  I have discussed in detail the process of objectification of linguistic  phenomena in Vedic texts. For example, in Vedic literature, one  comes across praise for those who are the bearers of memorized  magical chants. The Atharvaveda (Śaunakīya 11.5.22, 11.5.24) says  that a priestly youth bears the shining incantation, and that this potent  incantation thus installed in the priestly youth protects everything.  While the performed incantation has to be sequentially stretched along  the axis of time, the incantation as installed in the priestly youth is  an object of memory, and has no sequentiality to it. The hymns thus  objectified and stored in the reciter’s memories were not merely  sequentially reproduced, but were actively manipulated in producing  various permutations and combinations.58 Features attributed to written  language become possible with this mental storage of Vedic hymns.  Among the permutations and combinations of Vedic texts, consider the  variety called Jaṭā “braiding”, where the words of a text are repeated  in the following order. If the words occur in the text as AB, then the  Jaṭā recitation becomes ABBAAB. If the three words in a sequence are  ABC, then the Ghana recitation becomes ABBAABCCBAABC. Such  permutations and combinations become possible only with the priestly  memory providing non-temporal flatland storage for texts, where one  can go in and access any item at any time.  

It is essentially such a flatland atemporal perception of language  that allowed Pāṇini to construct his rules. Pāṇini’s visual terminology  (dṛś, dṛṣṭa, adarśana etc.) to refer to observed linguistic phenomena,  as I have discussed earlier, has a long pedigree, and it is this “seeing”  the language, rather than merely “hearing” it, that allows Pāṇini to  formulate his rules in an atemporal plane. If a rule is to say “change A 

to B, if followed by C”, it is clear that the grammarian is laying out all  the elements on a flat plane, and evaluating relationships between the  various units. For example, Pāṇini’s definition of Saṃhitā “euphonic  combination” is given in rule 1.4.108 (paraḥ sannikarṣaḥ saṃhitā):  “Maximal closeness between items is called Saṃhitā”. This assumes  that there are two sounds or words, next to each other, without any  gap between them. The word Saṃhitā59 literally means joining,  

58 For the details of these Vedic permutations and combinations of texts, see  DESHPANDE 2002, Introduction. 

59 Professor SCHARFE suggests in a personal communication that the word 

92 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

and in order to join two items, they must both be there. The flatland  atemporal assumptions behind such formulations can be produced in  the environment of Vedic memory training, but they may also have  been facilitated by the presence of writing in the environment of the  grammarians. 

On the other hand, Kātyāyana’s objections to Pāṇini’s formulation  bring out the view of sequential and temporal production of oral  speech. The first objection says, if maximal closeness is the definition  of Saṃhitā, it will not apply to speech that is not fast. 

Then, Kātyāyana says, if Saṃhitā is defined as the continuity or  non-stoppage of voicing (hrāda-avirāma), then we cannot have a  Saṃhitā in the combination of a stop and a voiceless sound, because  there may not be continuity of voicing in such combination, as there  is no voicing to begin with. Finally, Kātyāyana objects: If Saṃhitā is  defined as a temporal sequence of sounds, without a temporal gap, such  a sequence of sounds is not possible, because speech-production goes  only one sound at a time, and the sounds are destroyed as soon as they  are uttered.60 Kātyāyana’s description of speech represents the point of  view of pure sequential speech production, with a philosophical tinge  of the Buddhist doctrine of momentariness. 

Patañjali responds to Kātyāyana’s objections by assuming a point  of view of human intelligence and memory providing an atemporal  storage of language. Patañjali says: “The sequentiality of linguistic  units is purely mental. A person, who acts with circumspection, sees  that he wants to use a certain word to express a certain meaning, and  that in this word, this sound comes first, then comes that sound, and  then the third, and so on”.61 While Patañjali’s solution sounds more like  

Saṃhitā perhaps originated as an adjective of some assumed word like vāk. 60 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. II: 306-308 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): Vārttika 1: paraḥ  sannikarṣaḥ saṃhitā ced adrutāyām asaṃhitam; Vārttika 7: hrādāvirāme  sparśāghoṣasaṃyoge ’sannidhānād asaṃhitam; Varttika 8: paurvāparyam  akālavyavetaṃ saṃhitā cet pūrvaparābhāvād asaṃhitam, ekavarṇavartitvād vācaḥ,  uccaritapradhvaṃsitvāc ca varṇānām; Bhāṣya: na hi varṇānāṃ paurvāparyam  asti  / kim kāraṇam  / ekavarṇa-vartitvād vācaḥ  / ekaikavarṇavartinī vāk na dvau  yugapad uccārayati  / gaur iti gakāre yāvad vāg vartate, naukāre, na visarjanīye  /  yāvad aukāre, na gakāre, na visarjanīye  / yāvad visarjanīye, na gakāre, naukāre  /  uccaritapradhvaṃsitvāt  / uccarita-pradhvaṃsinaḥ khalv api varṇāḥ  / uccaritaḥ  pradhvastaḥ / athāparaḥ prayujyate / na varṇo varṇasya sahāyaḥ / 61 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. II: 309 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): “buddhau kṛtvā sarvāś  ceṣṭāḥ kartā dhīras tanvannītiḥ  / śabdenārthān vācyān dṛṣṭvā buddhau kuryāt  paurvāparyam/” buddhiviṣayam eva śabdānāṃ paurvāparyam / iha ya eṣa manuṣyaḥ 

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 93 

that of a psychologist or an ideologist, Kātyāyana’s objections seem to  come from the background of articulatory phonetics of the Prātiśākhyas,  where speech is seen as an articulatory process stretched out in time,  rather than a conceptual flat land where two or more sounds or words  could co-exist in a given moment, with or without a gap between them.  

Pāṇini’s definition of Saṃhitā can be fruitfully compared with  the definition given in the Vājasaneyi Prātiśākhya (1.158): varṇānām  ekaprāṇayogaḥ saṃhitā “Saṃhitā refers to the production of sounds in  a single breath”. This is a definition in purely oral/articulatory terms, as  compared to the flatland conceptual phonology of Pāṇini and Patañjali.  This conceptual phonological flatland can sit well with the presence of  writing in the background.62 While Pāṇini’s philosophical conceptions  are unknown to us, Patañjali’s more explicit conceptions may reflect  emerging philosophical schools of the time. 

Finally, after all the objections coming from an oral/articulatory  point of view, Kātyāyana simply admits that the notions of Saṃhitā  “conjoined recitation” and Avasāna [“end of utterance” or “pause”] are  too well known in the world, and need not be defined.63 What does it  mean that the notion of Saṃhitā is well known in the world? The first  suggestion is that such a notion is much older than Pāṇini and Kātyāyana,  and whatever philosophical objections one has, the notion of Saṃhitā  or Sandhi between linguistic items is too deeply entrenched. Kaiyaṭa  provides a historical nuance to Kātyāyana’s admission. Kaiyaṭa says  that, just as the term Saṃhitā is well known for a continuous sequence  of two words in the world of Vedic reciters, similarly is its extension  to the continuous sequence of two sounds well known, within the same  world of Vedic reciters.64 

This suggests an important historical aspect of the evolution of the  term Saṃhitā. The original context of its usage was recitational, rather  than phonological or philosophical, and hence, Kātyāyana, finally  brushes aside the objections raised from these other perspectives simply  

prekṣāpūrvakārī bhavati, sa paśyati, asmin arthe ’yaṃ śabdaḥ prayoktavyaḥ, asmiṃs  tāvacchabde ’yaṃ tāvad varṇas tato ’yaṃ tato ’yam iti // 

62 THIEME (1937-38) argues for the identification of Kātyāyana, the author  of the Vārttikas on Pāṇini, and the author of the Vājasaneyi-Prātiśākhya. That may  explain the closeness of the views on Saṃhitā expressed in the Vārttikas and the  Vājasaneyi-Prātiśākhya. 

63 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. II: 312 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): Vārttika 7 on P 1.4.109  (virāmo ’vasānam): saṃhitāvasānayor lokaviditatvāt siddham. 

64 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. II: 312 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): Pradīpa: yathā padanairantarye  saṃhitāvyavahāras tathaikapadye ’pi varṇanairantarye /

94 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

by asserting that this notion is too well known in the world. In this  discussion, we have exposed the presence of two different perspectives  on language, one of purely oral/articulatory speech production, and the  other, a mentalistic or a psychological atemporal perception, storage  and retrieval of speech and texts. Such an atemporal psychological  perception of speech is consistent with the presence of writing in the  cultural environment of the grammarians, but its roots definitely go  back into the memorization practices of the Vedic reciters. 

## 13. Appearance of writing
13. Appearance of writing into later grammatical discussions 

In some of the late works in the grammatical tradition, issues relating  to written language begin to appear on the margins. They never take the  center-stage, but remain on the margins. While Bhartṛhari clearly refers  to written manuscripts,65 any explicit discussion of written language  comes much later. I will discuss a few such examples. For example,  referring to Siddhāntakaumudī’s description of the Jihvāmūlīya and  Upadhmānīya as being like a half-visarga (ardha-visarga-sadṛśau),  the Prauḍha-manoramā says that this similarity with a Visarga is both  in pronunciation and writing.66 Relating to the derivation of the form  rājñaḥ from rājan, the Siddhāntakaumudī quotes a rule:67 jañor jñaḥ “When j and ñ are combined, the result is jñ”. Commenting on this  statement, Nāgeśa’s Laghuśabdenduśekhara says:68 

This is a statement of some authority referring to the sound jñ resulting from the combination of j and ñ, well known in the world  and in the Veda, as well as its distinctive written character. This  is not a separate sound. There is no reason to treat it as a separate  sound, as no such separate sound in mentioned in the Śikṣās”.  Śivadatta KUDDĀLA, the editor of the Siddhānta-kaumudī, has a  more elaborate critique:69 “This statement simply is an explanation  

65 Mahābhāṣyadīpikā: 33: grantheṣu cālikhitatvād idam avasitam /. 66 Prauḍhamanoramā: 78: sādṛśyam uccāraṇe lekhane ca bodhyam. While the  Visarga is written with two small circles, the Jihvāmūlīya and the Upadhmānīya are  written with two half-circles. 

67 Siddhāntakaumudī: 98. 

68 Laghuśabdenduśekhara: 395: j-ñ-yoge lokavedasiddhatādṛśadhvaner  lipiviśeṣasya cānuvādakam abhiyuktavacanam, na tv idam varṇāntaram, śikṣādāv  aparigaṇitatvena tatsattve mānābhāvāt/. 

69 Siddhāntakaumudī: 98, editor’s footnote: saṃyuktakramalipiviśeṣasyānuvād akam idam / ata eva śikṣāyāṃ viśiṣya noktam / paraṃ tu vyartham eva tattaddeśeṣu 

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 95 

of the special written character used for this cluster. For this reason,  the Śikṣā does not specifically refer to it. However, this statement  is useless, because there is no common form of writing this cluster  in different regions. Nor does it represent a specific sound, because  there is no regularity about its pronunciation. Similarly, a statement  written by someone else in a different context, namely, ‘combination  of k and ṣ is kṣ’, is also [useless]. 

Finally, I want to point to a discussion by Nāgeśa on recognizing  the communicative value of the written language, along with the value  of the spoken language. P. 1.1.68 (aṇ udit savarṇasya cāpratyayaḥ) says  that a non-affixal aṇ sound or a sound marked with u stands for itself  and for its homogeneous sounds. Here, one assumes that the vowel  a as uttered in the Śivasūtra a-i-u-ṇ would represent homogeneous  varieties like long ā. On this rule, Kātyāyana’s Vārttika 3 raises a  concern: “If the short a denoted by the sound a [in the Śivasūtra a-i-u-ṇ  is expected to further denote homogeneous long varieties etc.], such  further denotation cannot take place, because an expression as uttered  stands only for the sounds as uttered”.70 Nāgeśa feels the need to reject  an inference from this discussion that only orally articulated speech  sounds have denotative power, and that such power does not extend to  written language. Nāgeśa says:  

Someone argues that the statement in the Bhāṣya is not appropriate,  because it is the knowledge of all types of signifiers that leads to  the understanding [of the signified meanings], because, otherwise,  if only the orally articulated sounds were able to signify, a person  reading a book in silence would not be able to understand any  meaning. Such an argument is false. As in the case of a mental  recitation of a mantra, even in the case of reading, there is also  very subtle articulation of sounds, and hence there is no problem  in understanding meaning. In chanting a mantra (even silently or  mentally), there is a requirement that a chanting be done with all  three accents, and the distinctions like the accents and lengths of  vowels cannot manifest without an articulation. Or perhaps, like  the body-movements, writing is also capable of signifying meaning  

liper ekākāratvābhāvāt / nāpi dhvaniviśeṣānuvādakam, tasyāpy anityatvāt / evam eva  kaiścid anyatra likhitaṃ “kaṣasaṃyoge kṣaḥ” ity apīti bodhyam /. 70 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 509-510 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): Varttika 3:  hrasvasampratyayād iti ced uccāryamāṇaśabdasaṃpratyāyakatvāt śabdasyāvacanam;  Patañjali says: uccāryamāṇaḥ śabdaḥ saṃpratyāyako bhavati, na sampratīyamānaḥ /

96 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

by convention. That is why the ignorant people think of the written  signs as words. Or perhaps, the written script becomes a signifier  because of a beginningless identification with spoken words. Even  for those learned people who know for certain that the written signs  are not the real words, the written signs become signifiers through  identification [with spoken words]. This is like the worldly behavior  of knowledgeable people. They know that the notion that one’s mind  is the same as one’s true Self is false, and yet their worldly behavior  still takes place through the beginningless identification of the mind  with the true Self.71 

Nāgeśa’s statement shows the reluctance of the Sanskrit  grammarians to fully come to terms with the significance of writing.  The half-hearted acceptance of the reality of writing and its ability to  communicate is somewhat similar to the treatment of the vernacular  languages by the orthodox Sanskrit grammarians. The written language  is not given the serious treatment it deserves, because even though the  phenomenon of writing has become a part of the normal life by this  time, and even though the Sanskrit grammarians themselves are writing  down their texts, they still value the practice of orality. This reminds  me of the story of my revered teacher from Pune, the late Pandit Vaman  Shastri Bhagavat. He spent some years in Banaras studying Pāṇini with  a learned pandit. Each day, he used to walk to the Ganges to take a bath.  From the time he left his residence till the time he returned, he would  recite the whole text of the Aṣṭādhyāyī. Even while reading works  on Sanskrit grammar with us, he rarely needed to consult a printed  book, as he had memorized most of the important texts by heart. His  detailed explanations of grammatical derivations were almost always  oral, and he rarely used the black board. This was probably even truer  for the generations of Bhaṭṭoji Dīkṣita and Nāgeśabhaṭṭa. For them,  

71 Mahābhāṣya, Vol. I: 509-510 (Nirṇayasāgara edn.): Nāgeśa’s Uddyota:  etenoccāritānām eva pratyāyakatve rahasi pustakam īkṣamāṇasya bodhānāpatter  vācakajñānasāmānyasyaiva bodhe tantratvena idam ayuktam ity apāstam  /  mānasajapasthala iva tatrāpi svīyasūkṣmoccāraṇād bodhenākṣateḥ / jape hi mantrāṇāṃ  traisvaryaniyamena tattatsthāneṣu uccādideśopalabhyamānatvarūpodāttatvāder mā 

trākālikatvādirūpahrasvatvādeś ca vinoccāraṇam anabhivyakteḥ  / yad vā liper eva  ceṣṭādivat saṃketena bodhakatvam / ata eva lipau śabdatvabhramo bālānām / yad vā  lipāv anādeḥ śabdatādātmyādhyāsād bodhakatvam / lipau śabdatvabādhajñānavatām  paṇḍitānām api antaḥkaraṇādāv ātmatvapratyaye bhramatvaṃ jānatām  anādisiddhāropeṇaiva vyavahāravad bodho ’pi /; the commentary Vivaraṇa on Pradīpa  also says that the unlearned think that the written signs are the sounds (akṣara): lipiṣv  evākṣarabuddhir abuddhānām, Mahābhāṣya-Pradīpa-Vyākhyānāni, Vol. I: 21.From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 97 

the writing was at best a secondary aid, and did not deserve the full  analytical attention that the real language, the spoken language, did.  Going farther back in time, the marginality of the written form for such  orthodox Vedic traditions probably increased exponentially, and hence  the influence of writing on their thinking was also, in all probability,  very marginal. Yet, we cannot forget that for the Indian civilization as a  whole there was a gradual shift from pure orality, to orality sharing the  stage with writing, and the Sanskrit grammarians could not stay apart  from this shift, even though they continued to give the written language  only a marginal importance. 

## Bibliography 

AKLUJKAR, Ashok. “The Aṣṭādhyāyī as a Case of Textual Criticism (Part  2).” In: Proceedings of the International Seminar on Studies in the  Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini (ed. by S.D. JOSHI and S.D. LADDU), Pune:  Centre of Advanced Study in Sanskrit, University of Pune, 1983, pp.  1-10; 

ALLEN, W. Sidney. Phonetics in Ancient India. London Oriental Series-1.  London: Oxford University Press, 1953; 

BIRWÉ, Robert. “Variae lectiones in Adhyāya IV und V der Aṣṭādhyāyī.” In:  Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, 108, 1958,  pp. 133-154; 

BRONKHORST, Johannes.“Advice for Grammarians.” In: Asiatische  Studien-Études Asiatiques, LXII, 2, 2008, pp. 475-484; 

——— “Critique et transmission textuelles dans la tradition Pāṇinéenne.”  In: Écrire et transmettre en Inde classique, (ed. by Gérard COLAS and  Gerdi GERSCHHEIMER), Paris, 2009, pp. 269-286; 

CARDONA, George. “Pāṇini’s definition, description and use of Svarita.”  In: Pratidānam, Indian, Iranian and Indo-European Studies presented  to F.B.J. Kuiper on his sixtieth birthday. The Hague: Mouton  Publishers,1968, pp. 448-461; 

——— Studies in Indian Grammarians. I. The Method of Description Reflected  in the Śivasūtras. In: Transactions of the American Philosophical Society,  New Series, vol. 59, no. 1. Philadelphia: American Philosophical  Society, 1969; 

——— Pāṇini: A Survey of Research. The Hague-Paris: Mouton, 1976;

98 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

——— Recent Research in Pāṇinian Studies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,  1999; 

——— Review of Richard Salomon’s Indian Epigraphy. In: Language, 76, n.  2, 2000, pp. 454-456; 

——— “Pāṇinian Sūtras of the Type anyebhyo ’pi dṛśyante.” In: Jambū-jyoti, Munivara Jambūvijaya Festschrift (ed. A. DHAKY and J.B. SHAH),  Ahmedabad, 2004, pp. 91-107; 

DAHIYA, Yajan Vee. Pāṇini as a Linguist: Ideas and Patterns. Delhi: Eastern  Book Linkers, 1995; 

DESHPANDE, Madhav M. “Pāṇinian Procedure of Taparakaraṇa: a Historical  Investigation.” In: Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung, 86, 2,  1972, pp. 207-254; 

——— Critical Studies in Indian Grammarians: The theory of homogeneity  [sāvarṇya], The Michigan Series in South and Southeast Asian  Languages and Linguistics, No. 2. Ann Arbor: Center for South and  Southeast Asian Studies, The University of Michigan, 1975; 

——— Review of Katre’s Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini. In: Language, 65, 3, 1989,  pp. 646-648; 

——— “Changing conceptions of the Veda: From speech-acts to magical  sounds.” In: Brahmavidya, Adyar Library Bulletin, 54, 1990, pp. 1-41; ——— “Indian theories on phonetics.” In: History of the Language Sciences,  1, (ed. Sylvain Auroux et al.), 2000, pp. 137-146, and “The role of  linguistics in Indian society and education”. Ibid: pp. 173-177; ——— Recitational Permutations of the Śaunakīya Atharvaveda. Harvard  Oriental Series, 61. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002; FALK, Harry. Schrift im alten Indien. Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 1993; GOLDSTÜCKER, Theodor. Pāṇini: His place in Sanskrit Literature. London  1860, reprinted in Banaras: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1965; GOODY, Jack. The Domestication of the Savage Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press, 1977; 

GOYAL, S.R. Brahmī Script: an invention of the early Maurya period.  Jodhpur: Kusumanjali Book World, 2006; 

HINÜBER, Oskar von. Der Beginn der Schrift und frühe Schriftlichkeit in  Indien, Wiesbaden: Abh. der Akademie der Wissenschaften und  Literatur, Mainz 1989, nr.11;  

JOSHI, Madhav Ganesh. Svarayuktā Aṣṭādhyāyī. Nipani, District Belgaum:  published by the author, 1992; 

JOSHI, S.D. Patañjali’s Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya, Samarthāhnika (P. 2.1.1),  edited with translation and explanatory notes. Publications of the Centre  of Advanced Study in Sanskrit, class C, no. 3. Pune: University of Pune,  1968;

From Orality to Writing: Transmission and Interpretation... 99 

JOSHI, S.D. and Saroja BHATE. The Fundamentals of Anuvṛtti. Pune: Centre  of Advanced Study in Sanskrit, University of Pune, 1984; 

JOSHI, S.D. and J.A.F. ROODBERGEN. Patañjali’s Vyākaraṇa Mahābhāṣya, Paspaśāhnika, with introduction, text, translation and  notes. Publications of the Centre of Advanced Study in Sanskrit, class C,  no. 15. Pune: University of Pune, 1986. 

——— The Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini with Translation and Explanatory Notes,  Vols. 1-12. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 1991-2006; 

KATRE, S.M. Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1987; KIELHORN, Franz. “Notes on the Mahâbhâshya; 17. Some devices of Indian  grammarians”. In: Indian Antiquary 16, 1887, pp. 244-252; ——— “Pāṇ. I, 3, 11: Svaritenādhikāraḥ”. In: Gurupūjākaumudī (Fs.  A.Weber), Leipzig, 1896, pp. 29-32; 

Laghuśabdenduśekhara of Nāgeśabhaṭṭa, volume 1, (ed. Nandkishore  SHASTRI). Shri Rajasthan Sanskrit College Granthamālā - 14. Banaras:  Bhargava Pustakalaya, 1936; 

Mahābhāṣyadīpika by Bhartṛhari, (ed. by K.V. ABHYANKAR and V.P.  LIMAYE). Post-Graduate and Research Department Series, no. 8,  Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1970; 

Mahābhāṣyapradīpavyākhyānāni, parts I (1973) and II (1975), (ed. by  M.S. NARASIMHACHARYA). Publications de l’Institut Français  d’Indologie, 51, 1-2. Pondichery: Institute Français d’Indologie ; 

MĪMĀṂSAKA, Yudhiṣṭhira. Saṃskrta vyākaraṇa-śāstra kā itihāsa, Vol. I,  3rd ed. Sonipat: Ramlal Kapur Trust, 1973 ; 

PALSULE, G.B. The Sanskrit Dhātupāṭhas, A Critical Study. Deccan College  Dissertation Series 23. Pune: Deccan College, 1961; 

Paribhāṣāsaṃgraha, (ed. by K. V. ABHYANKAR). Pune: Bhandarkar  Oriental Research Institute, 1967; 

Prauḍhamanoramā of Bhaṭṭojī Dīkṣita, with four commentaries, volume  1, (ed. by Gopal Shastri NENE). Kāśī Saṃskṛta Granthamālā 125.  Banaras: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1939; 

Śabdakaustubha of Bhaṭṭojī Dīkṣita. Volume 1, (ed. by Gopal Shastri NENE  and Mukund Shastri PUNTAMKAR), 1933; Volume 2, (ed. by Gopal  Shastri NENE), Banaras: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1929; 

SALOMON, Richard. “On the Origin of the Early Indian Scripts.” [review of  FALK and HINÜBER]. In: Journal of the American Oriental Society,  115, 2, 1995, pp. 271-279; 

——— Indian Epigraphy: a guide to the study of inscriptions in Sanskrit,  Prakrit, and the other Indo-Aryan languages. New York: Oxford  University Press, 1998;

100 MADHAV M. DESHPANDE 

——— 1998a. “Kharoṣṭhī Manuscript Fragments in the Pelliot Collection,  Bibliothèque Nationale de France.” In: Bulletin d’etudes Indienne, 16,  1998, pp. 123-160; 

Śaunakīyā Caturādhyāyikā, with the commentaries Caturādhyāyikā,  Bhārgava-Bhāskara-Vṛtti and Pañcasandhi, (ed. by Madhav M.  DESHPANDE). Harvard Oriental Series, vol. 52. Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press, 1997; 

SCHARFE, Hartmut. Pāṇini’s Metalanguage. Memoirs of the American  Philosophical Society, vol. 89. Philadelphia: American Philosophical  Society, 1971; 

——— “Something old and something new: Two traditional approaches to  Pāṇini.” In: Journal of the American Oriental Society, 109, 4, 1989, pp.  653-658; 

——— “Kharoṣṭhī and Brāhmī.” In: Journal of the American Oriental Society,  122, 2, 2002, pp. 391-393; 

——— A new perspective on Pāṇini. In: Indologica Taurenensia, 35, 2009,  pp. 1-270; 

SCHOLES, Robert J. (editor). Literacy and Language Analysis. Hillsdale, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers, 1993; 

Siddhāntakaumudī by Bhaṭṭoji Dīkṣita, with the commentary Tattvabodhinī,  (ed. by Śivadatta KUDDĀLA). Mumbai: Khemraj Shri Krishnadas,  1959; 

THIEME, Paul. “On the identity of the Vārttikakāra.” In: Indian Culture, IV,  2, 1937-38, pp. 189-209; 

——— “Das Indische Theater.” In: Fernöstliches Theater, Stuttgart: Heinz  Kindermann, 1966, pp. 21-120; 

Vājasaneyi-Prātiśākhya of Kātyāyana, with the commentaries of Uvaṭa and  Anantabhaṭṭa, (ed. by V. Venkatarama SHARMA). Madras University  Sanskrit Series, no. 5. Madras: University of Madras, 1934; 

Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali, with Kaiyaṭa’s Pradīpa and Nāgeśa’s  Uddyota. Volume 1 (2nd reprint 1917), Volume 2 (1912), Volume 3  (1937), Volume 5 (1945). Mumbai: Nirṇayasāgara Press; 

Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali, with Kaiyaṭa’s Pradīpa and Nāgeśa’s  Uddyota. Volume 3. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1967; 

WITZEL, Michael. “On the Archetype of Patañjali’s Mahābhāṣya.” In: Indo Iranian Journal, 29, 1986, pp. 249-259; 

——— Indo-Eurasian_research Group <http://groups.yahoo.com/group/ Indo-Eurasian_research/> message 6303 of 19 March 2007.